In women, they most commonly occur on the legs, while in men they most commonly occur on the back. About 25% of melanomas develop from moles. Changes in a mole that can indicate melanoma include an increase in size, irregular edges, change in color,
mole that can indicate melanoma include an increase in size, irregular edges, change in color, itchiness or skin breakdown.The primary cause of melanoma is ultraviolet light (UV) exposure in those with low levels of the skin pigment melanin. The UV light may be from the
its thickness, how fast the cells are dividing and whether or not the overlying skin has broken down.Melanoma is the most dangerous type of skin cancer. Globally, in 2012, it newly occurred in 232,000 people. In 2015, there were 3.1 million people with active disease
In 2015, there were 3.1 million people with active disease, which resulted in 59,800 deaths. Australia and New Zealand have the highest rates of melanoma in the world. There are also high rates in Northern Europe and North America, while it is less common in Asia, Africa
often in men than women. Melanoma has become more common since the 1960s in areas mostly populated by people of European descent.Early signs of melanoma are changes to the shape or color of existing moles or, in the case of nodular melanoma, the appearance of a new lump
the appearance of a new lump anywhere on the skin. At later stages, the mole may itch, ulcerate or bleed. Early signs of melanoma are summarized by the mnemonic "ABCDEF":AsymmetryBorders (irregular with edges and corners)Colour (variegated)Diameter (greater than 6 mm (0.24 in),
nodular melanoma, which has its own classifications:Elevated above the skin surfaceFirm to the touchGrowingMetastatic melanoma may cause nonspecific paraneoplastic symptoms, including loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting and fatigue. Metastasis (spread) of early melanoma is possible, but relatively rare: less than a fifth
appetite, nausea, vomiting and fatigue. Metastasis (spread) of early melanoma is possible, but relatively rare: less than a fifth of melanomas diagnosed early become metastatic. Brain metastases are particularly common in patients with metastatic melanoma. It can also spread to the liver, bones
from the sun. Genetics also plays a role. Melanoma can also occur in skin areas with little sun exposure (i.e. mouth, soles of feet, palms of hands, genital areas). People with dysplastic nevus syndrome, also known as familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM
Genetics also plays a role. Melanoma can also occur in skin areas with little sun exposure (i.e. mouth, soles of feet, palms of hands, genital areas). People with dysplastic nevus syndrome, also known as familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM), are at
. People with dysplastic nevus syndrome, also known as familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM), are at increased risk for the development of melanoma.Having more than fifty moles indicates an increased risk melanoma might arise. A weakened immune system makes it easier for cancer to arise
easier for cancer to arise due to the body's weakened ability to fight cancer cells.The ultraviolet radiation from tanning beds increases the risk of melanoma. The International Agency for Research on Cancer finds that tanning beds are "carcinogenic to humans" and that people who begin using tanning
to 1000 fold lower efficiency than UVB is absorbed).Exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVA and UVB) is one of the major contributors to the development of melanoma. Occasional extreme sun exposure (resulting in "sunburn") is causally related to melanoma. Melanoma is most common on the back
indoor versus outdoor occupations; it is more common in professional and administrative workers than unskilled workers. Other factors are mutations in or total loss of tumor suppressor genes. Use of sunbeds (with deeply penetrating UVA rays) has been linked to the development of skin cancers, including melanoma
is more common in professional and administrative workers than unskilled workers. Other factors are mutations in or total loss of tumor suppressor genes. Use of sunbeds (with deeply penetrating UVA rays) has been linked to the development of skin cancers, including melanoma.Possible significant elements in determining
mutations in or total loss of tumor suppressor genes. Use of sunbeds (with deeply penetrating UVA rays) has been linked to the development of skin cancers, including melanoma.Possible significant elements in determining risk include the intensity and duration of sun exposure, the age at which sun
rays) has been linked to the development of skin cancers, including melanoma.Possible significant elements in determining risk include the intensity and duration of sun exposure, the age at which sun exposure occurs, and the degree of skin pigmentation. Melanoma rates tend to be highest in countries
Possible significant elements in determining risk include the intensity and duration of sun exposure, the age at which sun exposure occurs, and the degree of skin pigmentation. Melanoma rates tend to be highest in countries settled by migrants from northern Europe that have a large amount of direct, intense
multiple severe sunburns increases the likelihood that future sunburns develop into melanoma due to cumulative damage. The sun and tanning beds are the main sources of UV radiation that increase the risk for melanoma and living close to the equator increases exposure to UV radiation.A number of rare mutations,
MC1R that causes red hair, have a relatively lower elevated risk. Genetic testing can be used to search for the mutations.One class of mutations affects the gene CDKN2A. An alternative reading frame mutation in this gene leads to the destabilization of p53, a transcription factor involved in apoptosis
to search for the mutations.One class of mutations affects the gene CDKN2A. An alternative reading frame mutation in this gene leads to the destabilization of p53, a transcription factor involved in apoptosis and in fifty percent of human cancers. Another mutation in the same gene results in a nonfunctional
Mutations that cause the skin condition xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) also increase melanoma susceptibility. Scattered throughout the genome, these mutations reduce a cell's ability to repair DNA. Both CDKN2A and XP mutations are highly penetrant (the chances of a carrier to express the phenotype is high).Familial melanoma
heterogeneous, and loci for familial melanoma appear on the chromosome arms 1p, 9p and 12q. Multiple genetic events have been related to melanoma's pathogenesis (disease development). The multiple tumor suppressor 1 (CDKN2A/MTS1) gene encodes p16INK4a – a low-molecular weight protein
(disease development). The multiple tumor suppressor 1 (CDKN2A/MTS1) gene encodes p16INK4a – a low-molecular weight protein inhibitor of cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) – which has been localised to the p21 region of human chromosome 9. FAMMM is typically characterized
to the p21 region of human chromosome 9. FAMMM is typically characterized by having 50 or more combined moles in addition to a family history of melanoma. It is transmitted autosomal dominantly and mostly associated with the CDKN2A mutations. People who have CDKN2A mutation associated FAMMM have a 38 fold
people, persons with multiple atypical nevi or dysplastic nevi and persons born with giant congenital melanocytic nevi are at increased risk.A family history of melanoma greatly increases a person's risk because mutations in several genes have been found in melanoma-prone families. People with a history of
nevi or dysplastic nevi and persons born with giant congenital melanocytic nevi are at increased risk.A family history of melanoma greatly increases a person's risk because mutations in several genes have been found in melanoma-prone families. People with a history of one melanoma are at increased risk
skin, which means there is less protection from UV radiation. A family history could indicate a genetic predisposition to melanoma.The earliest stage of melanoma starts when melanocytes begin out-of-control growth. Melanocytes are found between the outer layer of the skin (the epidermis)
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). These cells sometimes completely destroy the primary tumor; this is called regression, which is the latest stage of development. In certain cases, the primary tumor is completely destroyed and only the metastatic tumor is discovered. About 40% of human melanomas
most specific mutation caused by UV, being frequently found in sun-exposed skin but rarely found in internal organs. Errors in DNA repair of UV photoproducts, or inaccurate synthesis past these photoproducts, can also lead to deletions, insertions and chromosomal translocations.The entire genomes of 25
are also expressed in other normal and cancer tissues, with some 200 genes showing a more specific expression pattern in melanoma compared to other forms of cancer. Examples of melanoma specific genes are tyrosinase, MLANA, and PMEL.UV radiation causes damage to the DNA of cells, typically thymine dimerization
other normal and cancer tissues, with some 200 genes showing a more specific expression pattern in melanoma compared to other forms of cancer. Examples of melanoma specific genes are tyrosinase, MLANA, and PMEL.UV radiation causes damage to the DNA of cells, typically thymine dimerization, which when unrepaired
melanoma compared to other forms of cancer. Examples of melanoma specific genes are tyrosinase, MLANA, and PMEL.UV radiation causes damage to the DNA of cells, typically thymine dimerization, which when unrepaired can create mutations in the cell's genes. This strong mutagenic factor makes cutaneous melanoma the
, MLANA, and PMEL.UV radiation causes damage to the DNA of cells, typically thymine dimerization, which when unrepaired can create mutations in the cell's genes. This strong mutagenic factor makes cutaneous melanoma the tumor type with the highest number of mutations. When the cell divides, these mutations
MLANA, and PMEL.UV radiation causes damage to the DNA of cells, typically thymine dimerization, which when unrepaired can create mutations in the cell's genes. This strong mutagenic factor makes cutaneous melanoma the tumor type with the highest number of mutations. When the cell divides, these mutations
which when unrepaired can create mutations in the cell's genes. This strong mutagenic factor makes cutaneous melanoma the tumor type with the highest number of mutations. When the cell divides, these mutations are propagated to new generations of cells. If the mutations occur in protooncogenes or tumor suppressor
factor makes cutaneous melanoma the tumor type with the highest number of mutations. When the cell divides, these mutations are propagated to new generations of cells. If the mutations occur in protooncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, the rate of mitosis in the mutation-bearing cells can become uncontrolled
cell divides, these mutations are propagated to new generations of cells. If the mutations occur in protooncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, the rate of mitosis in the mutation-bearing cells can become uncontrolled, leading to the formation of a tumor. Data from patients suggest that aberrant levels
can become uncontrolled, leading to the formation of a tumor. Data from patients suggest that aberrant levels of activating transcription factor in the nucleus of melanoma cells are associated with increased metastatic activity of melanoma cells; studies from mice on skin cancer tend to confirm a role for activating transcription
a tumor. Data from patients suggest that aberrant levels of activating transcription factor in the nucleus of melanoma cells are associated with increased metastatic activity of melanoma cells; studies from mice on skin cancer tend to confirm a role for activating transcription factor-2 in cancer progression.Cancer stem cells may
recurrent somatic alterations likely driving initiation and development of cutaneous melanoma.The most frequent mutation occurs in the 600th codon of BRAF (50% of cases). BRAF is normally involved in cell growth and this specific mutation renders the protein constitutively active and independent of normal physiological regulation,
., NTRK3 and MET BRAF, RAS, NF1 mutations and kinase fusions are remarkably mutually-exclusive, as they occur in different subsets of patients. Assessment of mutation status can therefore improve patient stratification and inform targeted therapy with specific inhibitors.In some cases (3-7
MET BRAF, RAS, NF1 mutations and kinase fusions are remarkably mutually-exclusive, as they occur in different subsets of patients. Assessment of mutation status can therefore improve patient stratification and inform targeted therapy with specific inhibitors.In some cases (3-7%) mutated versions
moles that change and evolve will be a concern. Alternatively, some practitioners prefer elevation. Elevation can help identify a melanoma, but lack of elevation does not mean that the lesion is not a melanoma. Most melanomas in the US are detected before they become elevated. By the
visible, they may have progressed to the more dangerous invasive stage.In person inspection of suspicious skin lesions is more accurate than visual inspection of images of suspicious skin lesions. When used by trained specialists, dermoscopy is more helpful to identify malignant lesions than use of the naked eye
to detect "ugly ducklings", as many melanomas in these individuals resemble non-melanomas or are considered to be "wolves in sheep's clothing". These fair-skinned individuals often have lightly pigmented or amelanotic melanomas that do not present easy-to-observe color changes
, followed by histological analysis and Breslow scoring. Incisional biopsies such as punch biopsies are usually contraindicated in suspected melanomas, because of the possibility of sampling error or local implantation causing misestimation of tumour thickness. However, fears that such biopsies may increase the risk of metastatic disease seem unfounded
. Incisional biopsies such as punch biopsies are usually contraindicated in suspected melanomas, because of the possibility of sampling error or local implantation causing misestimation of tumour thickness. However, fears that such biopsies may increase the risk of metastatic disease seem unfounded.Total body photography, which involves photographic
in conjunction with (and not as a replacement for) dermoscopic imaging, with a combination of both methods appearing to give extremely high rates of detection.Melanoma is a type of neuroectodermal neoplasm. There are four main types of melanoma:Other histopathologic types are:Mucosal melanoma;
combination of both methods appearing to give extremely high rates of detection.Melanoma is a type of neuroectodermal neoplasm. There are four main types of melanoma:Other histopathologic types are:Mucosal melanoma; When melanoma occurs on mucous membranes.Desmoplastic melanomaMelanoma with small nevus-like cellsMelanoma with
melanoma.A melanoma in situ has not invaded beyond the basement membrane, whereas an invasive melanoma has spread beyond it.Some histopathological types of melanoma are inherently invasive, including nodular melanoma and lentigo maligna melanoma, where the in situ counterpart to lentigo maligna melanoma is lentigo maligna.
rays, CT scans, MRIs, PET and PET/CTs, ultrasound, LDH testing and photoacoustic detection. However, there is lack of evidence in the accuracy of staging of people with melanoma with various imaging methods.Melanoma stages according to AJCC, 8th edition:TX:
MRIs, PET and PET/CTs, ultrasound, LDH testing and photoacoustic detection. However, there is lack of evidence in the accuracy of staging of people with melanoma with various imaging methods.Melanoma stages according to AJCC, 8th edition:TX: Primary tumor thickness cannot
PET and PET/CTs, ultrasound, LDH testing and photoacoustic detection. However, there is lack of evidence in the accuracy of staging of people with melanoma with various imaging methods.Melanoma stages according to AJCC, 8th edition:TX: Primary tumor thickness cannot be assessed
) of:M0: No evidence of distant metastasisOlder systems include "Clark level" and "Breslow's depth", quantifying microscopic depth of tumor invasion.Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) tests are often used to screen for metastases, although many patients with metastases (even end-
, sentinel lymph node biopsies and examination of the lymph nodes are also performed in patients to assess spread to the lymph nodes. A diagnosis of melanoma is supported by the presence of the S-100 protein marker.HMB-45 is a monoclonal antibody that reacts against an antigen present in melanocytic tumors
melanocytic tumors such as melanomas. It is used in anatomic pathology as a marker for such tumors. The antibody was generated to an extract of melanoma. It reacts positively against melanocytic tumors but not other tumors, thus demonstrating specificity and sensitivity. The antibody also reacts positively against junctional
but not normal adult melanocytes.HMB-45 is nonreactive with almost all non-melanoma human malignancies, with the exception of rare tumors showing evidence of melanogenesis (e.g., pigmented schwannoma, clear cell sarcoma) or tumors associated with tuberous sclerosis complex (angiomyolipoma and lymphangiomyoma).There is no evidence to
with tuberous sclerosis complex (angiomyolipoma and lymphangiomyoma).There is no evidence to support or refute adult population screening for malignant melanoma.Minimizing exposure to sources of ultraviolet radiation (the sun and sunbeds), following sun protection measures and wearing sun protective clothing (long-sleeved shirts, long trousers
offer protection.Using artificial light for tanning was once believed to help prevent skin cancers, but it can actually lead to an increased incidence of melanomas.UV nail lamps, which are used in nail salons to dry nail polish, are another common and widespread source of UV radiation
increased incidence of melanomas.UV nail lamps, which are used in nail salons to dry nail polish, are another common and widespread source of UV radiation that could be avoided. Although the risk of developing skin cancer through UV nail lamp use is low, it is still recommended
UV light to generate vitamin D so there is a need to balance getting enough sunlight to maintain healthy vitamin D levels and reducing the risk of melanoma; it takes around a half hour of sunlight for the body to generate its vitamin D for the day and this is about the
a need to balance getting enough sunlight to maintain healthy vitamin D levels and reducing the risk of melanoma; it takes around a half hour of sunlight for the body to generate its vitamin D for the day and this is about the same amount of time it takes for fair-
it takes around a half hour of sunlight for the body to generate its vitamin D for the day and this is about the same amount of time it takes for fair-skinned people to get a sunburn. Exposure to sunlight can be intermittent instead of all at one time.
to sunlight can be intermittent instead of all at one time.Sunscreen appears to be effective in preventing melanoma. In the past, use of sunscreens with a sun protection factor (SPF) rating of 50 or higher on exposed areas were recommended; as older sunscreens more effectively blocked
lower SPFs. Sunscreen also protects against squamous cell carcinoma, another skin cancer.Concerns have been raised that sunscreen might create a false sense of security against sun damage.A 2005 review found tentative evidence that statin and fibrate medication may decrease the risk of melanoma. A 2006 review
might create a false sense of security against sun damage.A 2005 review found tentative evidence that statin and fibrate medication may decrease the risk of melanoma. A 2006 review however did not support any benefit.Confirmation of the clinical diagnosis is done with a skin biopsy. This is
the stage, a sentinel lymph node biopsy may be performed. Controversy exists around trial evidence for sentinel lymph node biopsy; with unclear evidence of benefit as of 2015. Treatment of advanced malignant melanoma is performed from a multidisciplinary approach.Excisional biopsies may remove the tumor, but further
malignant melanoma is performed from a multidisciplinary approach.Excisional biopsies may remove the tumor, but further surgery is often necessary to reduce the risk of recurrence. Complete surgical excision with adequate surgical margins and assessment for the presence of detectable metastatic disease along with short- and long-term followup
are treated with narrower surgical margins, usually 0.2–0.5 cm (0.1–0.2 in). Many surgeons consider 0.5 cm (0.2 in) the standard of care for standard excision of melanoma-in-situ, but 0.2 cm (0.1 in) margin might be acceptable for margin controlled surgery
margins, usually 0.2–0.5 cm (0.1–0.2 in). Many surgeons consider 0.5 cm (0.2 in) the standard of care for standard excision of melanoma-in-situ, but 0.2 cm (0.1 in) margin might be acceptable for margin controlled surgery (Mohs surgery, or
margin controlled surgery (Mohs surgery, or the double-bladed technique with margin control). The wide excision aims to reduce the rate of tumor recurrence at the site of the original lesion. This is a common pattern of treatment failure in melanoma. Considerable research has aimed to
). The wide excision aims to reduce the rate of tumor recurrence at the site of the original lesion. This is a common pattern of treatment failure in melanoma. Considerable research has aimed to elucidate appropriate margins for excision with a general trend toward less aggressive treatment during the last
CCPDMA and the "double scalpel" peripheral margin controlled surgery is equivalent to Mohs surgery in effectiveness on this "intra-epithelial" type of melanoma.Melanomas that spread usually do so to the lymph nodes in the area of the tumor before spreading elsewhere. Attempts to improve survival
with many complications, but no overall survival benefit. Recently, the technique of sentinel lymph node biopsy has been developed to reduce the complications of lymph node surgery while allowing assessment of the involvement of nodes with tumor.Biopsy of sentinel lymph nodes is a widely used procedure when treating
Recently, the technique of sentinel lymph node biopsy has been developed to reduce the complications of lymph node surgery while allowing assessment of the involvement of nodes with tumor.Biopsy of sentinel lymph nodes is a widely used procedure when treating cutaneous melanoma.Neither sentinel lymph node biopsy nor other
is considered unnecessary health care for them. Furthermore, baseline blood tests and radiographic studies should not be performed only based on identifying this kind of melanoma, as there are more accurate tests for detecting cancer and these tests have high false-positive rates. To potentially correct false positives
-needle aspiration biopsy may be performed and is often used to test masses.If a lymph node is positive, depending on the extent of lymph node spread, a radical lymph node dissection will often be performed. If the disease is completely resected, the patient will be considered
often be performed. If the disease is completely resected, the patient will be considered for adjuvant therapy.Excisional skin biopsy is the management of choice. Here, the suspect lesion is totally removed with an adequate (but minimal, usually 1 or 2 mm) ellipse of surrounding
otherwise good health will begin up to a year of high-dose interferon treatment, which has severe side effects, but may improve the patient's prognosis slightly. However, the British Association of Dermatologists guidelines on melanoma state that interferon is not recommended as a standard adjuvant treatment for melanoma
good health will begin up to a year of high-dose interferon treatment, which has severe side effects, but may improve the patient's prognosis slightly. However, the British Association of Dermatologists guidelines on melanoma state that interferon is not recommended as a standard adjuvant treatment for melanoma
guidelines on melanoma state that interferon is not recommended as a standard adjuvant treatment for melanoma. A 2013 meta-analysis suggested that the addition of interferon alpha increased disease-free and overall survival for people with AJCC TNM stage II-III cutaneous melanoma. A 2011 meta-analysis
the time before a melanoma comes back but increased survival by only 3% at 5 years. The unpleasant side effects also greatly decrease quality of life.In Europe, interferon is usually not used outside the scope of clinical trials.Chemotherapy drugs such as Dacarbazine have been the backbone
trials.Chemotherapy drugs such as Dacarbazine have been the backbone of metastatic melanoma treatment since FDA approval in 1975 however, its efficacy in terms of survival has never been proven in an RCT.In people with locally advanced cutaneous malignancies and sarcoma, isolated limb infusion (ILI) has been found
therapy no longer effective, but combining the use of BRAF and MEK inhibitors may create a fast and lasting melanoma therapy response.A number of treatments improve survival over traditional chemotherapy. Biochemotherapy (chemotherapy with cytokines IL-2 and IFN-α) combined with BRAF inhibitors improved survival for people
PFS) times. The therapy combination of dabrafenib and trametinib has a 3-year PFS of 23%, and 5-year PFS of 13%.Immunotherapy is aimed at stimulating the person's immune system against the tumor, by enhancing the body's own ability to recognize and kill cancer
enhancing the body's own ability to recognize and kill cancer cells.  The current approach to treating melanoma with immunotherapy includes three broad categories of treatments including cytokines, immune check point inhibitors, and adoptive cell transfer. These treatment options are most often used in people with metastatic melanoma
metastatic melanoma in 20 years. IL-2 may offer the possibility of a complete and long-lasting remission in this disease in a small percentage of people with melanoma. Intralesional IL-2 for in-transit metastases has a high complete response rate ranging from 40 to 100%. Similarly,
palliation of metastatic melanoma.Factors that affect prognosis include:tumor thickness in millimeters (Breslow's depth),depth related to skin structures (Clark level),type of melanoma,presence of ulceration,presence of lymphatic/perineural invasion,presence of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (if present, prognosis is better),location
.Factors that affect prognosis include:tumor thickness in millimeters (Breslow's depth),depth related to skin structures (Clark level),type of melanoma,presence of ulceration,presence of lymphatic/perineural invasion,presence of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (if present, prognosis is better),location of lesion,presence
(Breslow's depth),depth related to skin structures (Clark level),type of melanoma,presence of ulceration,presence of lymphatic/perineural invasion,presence of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (if present, prognosis is better),location of lesion,presence of satellite lesions, andpresence of regional or distant metastasis.
melanoma,presence of ulceration,presence of lymphatic/perineural invasion,presence of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (if present, prognosis is better),location of lesion,presence of satellite lesions, andpresence of regional or distant metastasis.Certain types of melanoma have worse prognoses but this is explained by
ulceration,presence of lymphatic/perineural invasion,presence of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (if present, prognosis is better),location of lesion,presence of satellite lesions, andpresence of regional or distant metastasis.Certain types of melanoma have worse prognoses but this is explained by their thickness. Less
infiltrating lymphocytes (if present, prognosis is better),location of lesion,presence of satellite lesions, andpresence of regional or distant metastasis.Certain types of melanoma have worse prognoses but this is explained by their thickness. Less invasive melanomas even with lymph node metastases carry a better prognosis than deep
is explained by their thickness. Less invasive melanomas even with lymph node metastases carry a better prognosis than deep melanomas without regional metastasis at time of staging. Local recurrences tend to behave similarly to a primary unless they are at the site of a wide local excision (as opposed to
these recurrences tend to indicate lymphatic invasion.When melanomas have spread to the lymph nodes, one of the most important factors is the number of nodes with malignancy. Extent of malignancy within a node is also important; micrometastases in which malignancy is only microscopic have a more favorable prognosis
invasion.When melanomas have spread to the lymph nodes, one of the most important factors is the number of nodes with malignancy. Extent of malignancy within a node is also important; micrometastases in which malignancy is only microscopic have a more favorable prognosis than macrometastases. In some cases
year survival rate is less than 10%. The median survival is 6–12 months. Treatment is palliative, focusing on life extension and quality of life. In some cases, patients may live many months or even years with metastatic melanoma (depending on the aggressiveness of the treatment)
outcomes.Globally, in 2012, melanoma occurred in 232,000 people and resulted in 55,000 deaths. Australia and New Zealand have the highest rates of melanoma in the world. It has become more common in the last 20 years in areas that are mostly Caucasian.The rate of melanoma
rates of melanoma in the world. It has become more common in the last 20 years in areas that are mostly Caucasian.The rate of melanoma has increased in the recent years, but it is not clear to what extent changes in behavior, in the environment, or in
extent changes in behavior, in the environment, or in early detection are involved.Australia has a very high – and increasing – rate of melanoma. In 2012, deaths from melanoma occurred in 7.3–9.8 per 100,000 population. In Australia, melanoma is the third most common cancer in
new cases per 100,000 population per year; >1 in 10 of all new cancer cases were melanomas. Melanoma incidence in Australia is matter of significance, for the following reasons:Australian melanoma incidence has increased by more than 30 per cent between 1991 and 2009.Australian melanoma age-standardised
whites, 0.1% (1 in 1,000) for African Americans, and 0.5% (1 in 200) for Hispanics.The risk of melanoma increases as people age. The average age of people when the disease is diagnosed is 63.Although melanoma is not a new disease, evidence
African Americans, and 0.5% (1 in 200) for Hispanics.The risk of melanoma increases as people age. The average age of people when the disease is diagnosed is 63.Although melanoma is not a new disease, evidence for its occurrence in antiquity is rather scarce. However
, one example lies in a 1960s examination of nine Peruvian mummies, radiocarbon dated to be approximately 2400 years old, which showed apparent signs of melanoma: melanotic masses in the skin and diffuse metastases to the bones.John Hunter is reported to be the first to operate on metastatic
presented during a lecture for the Faculté de Médecine de Paris in 1804 and then published as a bulletin in 1806.The first English-language report of melanoma was presented by an English general practitioner from Stourbridge, William Norris in 1820. In his later work in 1857 he remarked that there
general practitioner from Stourbridge, William Norris in 1820. In his later work in 1857 he remarked that there is a familial predisposition for development of melanoma (Eight Cases of Melanosis with Pathological and Therapeutical Remarks on That Disease). Norris was also a pioneer in suggesting a link between
, by observing that most of his patients had pale complexions. He also described that melanomas could be amelanotic and later showed the metastatic nature of melanoma by observing that they can disseminate to other visceral organs.The first formal acknowledgment of advanced melanoma as untreatable came from Samuel Cooper in
These cells are grown in large numbers in a laboratory and returned to the patient after a treatment that temporarily reduces normal T cells in the patient's body. TIL therapy following lymphodepletion can result in durable complete response in a variety of setups.The second treatment, adoptive transfer of genetically
cells are grown in large numbers in a laboratory and returned to the patient after a treatment that temporarily reduces normal T cells in the patient's body. TIL therapy following lymphodepletion can result in durable complete response in a variety of setups.The second treatment, adoptive transfer of genetically
treatment that temporarily reduces normal T cells in the patient's body. TIL therapy following lymphodepletion can result in durable complete response in a variety of setups.The second treatment, adoptive transfer of genetically altered autologous lymphocytes, depends on delivering genes that encode so called T cell receptors (
, adoptive transfer of genetically altered autologous lymphocytes, depends on delivering genes that encode so called T cell receptors (TCRs), into patient's lymphocytes. After that manipulation lymphocytes recognize and bind to certain molecules found on the surface of melanoma cells and kill them.A cancer vaccine
T cell receptors (TCRs), into patient's lymphocytes. After that manipulation lymphocytes recognize and bind to certain molecules found on the surface of melanoma cells and kill them.A cancer vaccine showed modest benefit in late-stage testing in 2009 against melanoma.About 60% of
of melanoma cells and kill them.A cancer vaccine showed modest benefit in late-stage testing in 2009 against melanoma.About 60% of melanomas contain a mutation in the B-Raf gene. Early clinical trials suggested that B-Raf inhibitors including Plexxicon's vemurafenib could lead
-Raf gene. Early clinical trials suggested that B-Raf inhibitors including Plexxicon's vemurafenib could lead to substantial tumor regression in a majority of patients if their tumor contain the B-Raf mutation. In June 2011, a large clinical trial confirmed the positive findings from those earlier
versus 5.8 months. Some side effects were, however, increased in the combined study.In January 2014, the FDA approved the combination of dabrafenib and trametinib for the treatment of people with BRAF V600E/K-mutant metastatic melanoma. In June 2018, the FDA approved the
were, however, increased in the combined study.In January 2014, the FDA approved the combination of dabrafenib and trametinib for the treatment of people with BRAF V600E/K-mutant metastatic melanoma. In June 2018, the FDA approved the combination of a BRAF inhibitor encorafenib and
Researchers were also hopeful of improving the five year survival rate, though serious adverse side-effects were seen in some patients. A course of treatment costs $120,000. The drug's brandname is Yervoy.Advances in high resolution ultrasound scanning have enabled surveillance of metastatic burden to the
year survival rate, though serious adverse side-effects were seen in some patients. A course of treatment costs $120,000. The drug's brandname is Yervoy.Advances in high resolution ultrasound scanning have enabled surveillance of metastatic burden to the sentinel lymph nodes. The Screening and Surveillance
alternative to invasive surgical methods.In some countries oncolytic virotherapy methods are studied and used to treat melanoma. Oncolytic virotherapy is a promising branch of virotherapy, where oncolytic viruses are used to treat diseases; viruses can increase metabolism, reduce anti-tumor immunity and disorganize vasculature. Talimogene

will need to be diagnosed by biopsy. Treatment may include, surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and targeted drug therapy. The other type of sarcoma is a bone sarcoma. There are many types. The World Health Organization lists more than fifty subtypes.An earlier version of this
who are exposed to chlorophenols in wood preservatives and phenoxy herbicides may have an increased risk of developing soft-tissue sarcomas. An unusual percentage of patients with a rare blood vessel tumor, angiosarcoma of the liver, have been exposed to vinyl chloride in their work. This substance is
. This substance is used in the manufacture of certain plastics, notably PVC.In the early 1900s, when scientists were just discovering the potential uses of radiation to treat disease, little was known about safe dosage levels and precise methods of delivery. At that time, radiation was used to
1900s, when scientists were just discovering the potential uses of radiation to treat disease, little was known about safe dosage levels and precise methods of delivery. At that time, radiation was used to treat a variety of noncancerous medical problems, including enlargement of the tonsils, adenoids,
a variety of noncancerous medical problems, including enlargement of the tonsils, adenoids, and thymus gland. Later, researchers found that high doses of radiation caused soft-tissue sarcomas in some patients. Because of this risk, radiation treatment for cancer is now planned to ensure that the
soft-tissue sarcomas in some patients. Because of this risk, radiation treatment for cancer is now planned to ensure that the maximum dosage of radiation is delivered to diseased tissue while surrounding healthy tissue is protected as much as possible.Kaposi's sarcoma, a rare cancer of the
. Kaposi's sarcoma, however, has different characteristics than typical soft-tissue sarcomas and is treated differently.In a very small fraction of cases, sarcoma may be related to a rare inherited genetic alteration of the p53 gene and is known as Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Certain
The only reliable way to determine whether a soft-tissue tumour is benign or malignant is through a biopsy. The two methods for acquisition of tumour tissue for cytopathological analysis are:Needle aspiration biopsy, via  needleSurgically, via an incision made into the tumourA pathologist examines the tissue
an incision made into the tumourA pathologist examines the tissue under a microscope. If cancer is present, the pathologist can usually determine the type of cancer and its grade. Here, 'grade' refers to a scale used to represent concisely the predicted growth rate of the tumour and
doxorubicin chemotherapy as an adjuvant can reduce recurrence at the original site or elsewhere in the body. Evidence also suggests chemotherapy can increase the length of time patients live, but this is less certain evidence. The use of chemotherapy to prevent the spread of soft-tissue sarcomas has not
in the body. Evidence also suggests chemotherapy can increase the length of time patients live, but this is less certain evidence. The use of chemotherapy to prevent the spread of soft-tissue sarcomas has not been proven to be effective. If the cancer has spread to other areas
docetaxel and gemcitabine could be an effective chemotherapy regimen in patients with advanced soft-tissue sarcoma.The research in soft tissue sarcoma requires lot of effort because of its rarity and needs immense collaboration. In year 2019, few notable researches have been presented but mostly failed. However,
pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma. In a report by Dr. Sameer Rastogi et al, a patient with advanced pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma had excellent response to combination of pembrolizumab and pazopanib.Soft-tissue sarcomas are relatively uncommon cancers. They account for less than 1% of all new cancer cases each


also known as a transmissible disease or communicable disease, is an illness resulting from an infection.Infections can be caused by a wide range of pathogens, most prominently bacteria and viruses but also more unusual types. Hosts can fight infections using their immune system. Mammalian hosts react to
, antiprotozoals, and antihelminthics. Infectious diseases resulted in 9.2 million deaths in 2013 (about 17% of all deaths). The branch of medicine that focuses on infections is referred to as infectious disease.Infections are caused by infectious agents (pathogens) including:Bacteria (Mycobacterium
further subclassified into:Ascomycota, including yeasts such as Candida, filamentous fungi such as Aspergillus, Pneumocystis species, and dermatophytes, a group of organisms causing infection of skin and other superficial structures in humans.Basidiomycota, including the human-pathogenic genus Cryptococcus.Prions (although they
Ascomycota, including yeasts such as Candida, filamentous fungi such as Aspergillus, Pneumocystis species, and dermatophytes, a group of organisms causing infection of skin and other superficial structures in humans.Basidiomycota, including the human-pathogenic genus Cryptococcus.Prions (although they don't secrete toxins)Parasites
which symptoms take longer to develop than in an acute infection but arise more quickly than a chronic infection. A latent infection is a type of infection that may occur after an acute episode; the organism is present but symptoms are not; after time, the disease can reappear.
the organism is present but symptoms are not; after time, the disease can reappear. A focal infection is defined as the initial site of infection from which organisms travel via the bloodstream to another area of the body.Among the many varieties of microorganisms, relatively few cause disease
is defined as the initial site of infection from which organisms travel via the bloodstream to another area of the body.Among the many varieties of microorganisms, relatively few cause disease in otherwise healthy individuals. Infectious disease results from the interplay between those few pathogens and the defenses of the
healthy individuals. Infectious disease results from the interplay between those few pathogens and the defenses of the hosts they infect. The appearance and severity of disease resulting from any pathogen depend upon the ability of that pathogen to damage the host as well as the ability of the host to resist
damage to the host itself in an attempt to control the infection. Clinicians, therefore, classify infectious microorganisms or microbes according to the status of host defenses - either as primary pathogens or as opportunistic pathogens: Primary pathogens Primary pathogens cause disease as a result of their presence or activity
they cause) is, in part, a necessary consequence of their need to reproduce and spread. Many of the most common primary pathogens of humans only infect humans, however, many serious diseases are caused by organisms acquired from the environment or that infect non-human hosts.
or from the environment as a result of traumatic introduction (as in surgical wound infections or compound fractures). An opportunistic disease requires impairment of host defenses, which may occur as a result of genetic defects (such as Chronic granulomatous disease), exposure to antimicrobial drugs or immunosuppressive
cause secondary infection. Usually, opportunistic infections are viewed as secondary infections (because immunodeficiency or injury was the predisposing factor). Other types of infection Other types of infection consist of mixed, iatrogenic, nosocomial, and community-acquired infection. A mixed infection is an infection that
Usually, opportunistic infections are viewed as secondary infections (because immunodeficiency or injury was the predisposing factor). Other types of infection Other types of infection consist of mixed, iatrogenic, nosocomial, and community-acquired infection. A mixed infection is an infection that is caused by two
An example of this is Appendicitis, which is caused by Bacteroides fragilis and Escherichia coli. The second is an iatrogenic infection. This type of infection is one that is transmitted from a health care worker to a patient. A nosocomial infection is also one that occurs in a health
pure culture. Conversely, even clearly infectious diseases do not always meet the infectious criteria; for example, Treponema pallidum, the causative spirochete of syphilis, cannot be cultured in vitro – however the organism can be cultured in rabbit testes. It is less clear that a pure
understand infectious disease. Epidemiologists may determine differences among groups within a population, such as whether certain age groups have a greater or lesser rate of infection; whether groups living in different neighborhoods are more likely to be infected; and by other factors, such as gender and race.
; endemic, with a steady level of regular cases occurring in a region; epidemic, with a fast arising, and unusually high number of cases in a region; or pandemic, which is a global epidemic. If the cause of the infectious disease is unknown, epidemiology can
is a global epidemic. If the cause of the infectious disease is unknown, epidemiology can be used to assist with tracking down the sources of infection.Infectious diseases are sometimes called contagious diseases when they are easily transmitted by contact with an ill person or their secretions (e.g.,
subset of infectious disease that is especially infective or easily transmitted. Other types of infectious, transmissible, or communicable diseases with more specialized routes of infection, such as vector transmission or sexual transmission, are usually not regarded as "contagious", and often do not require medical isolation
easy transmissibility) is not always respected in popular use.Infectious diseases are commonly transmitted from person to person through direct contact. The types of contact are through person to person and droplet spread. Indirect contact such as airborne transmission, contaminated objects, food and drinking water, animal
infectionSkin infectionRespiratory tract infectionOdontogenic infection (an infection that originates within a tooth or in the closely surrounding tissues)Vaginal infectionsIntra-amniotic infectionIn addition, locations of inflammation where infection is the most common cause include pneumonia, meningitis and salpingitis.The symptoms of an infection depend on the type of disease
locations of inflammation where infection is the most common cause include pneumonia, meningitis and salpingitis.The symptoms of an infection depend on the type of disease. Some signs of infection affect the whole body generally, such as fatigue, loss of appetite, weight loss, fevers, night
is the most common cause include pneumonia, meningitis and salpingitis.The symptoms of an infection depend on the type of disease. Some signs of infection affect the whole body generally, such as fatigue, loss of appetite, weight loss, fevers, night sweats, chills, aches
symptoms of an infection depend on the type of disease. Some signs of infection affect the whole body generally, such as fatigue, loss of appetite, weight loss, fevers, night sweats, chills, aches and pains. Others are specific to individual body parts, such as
an infectious disease, as some infections do not cause illness in a host.As bacterial and viral infections can both cause the same kinds of symptoms, it can be difficult to distinguish which is the cause of a specific infection. Distinguishing the two is important, since viral infections
. Distinguishing the two is important, since viral infections cannot be cured by antibiotics whereas bacterial infections can.There is a general chain of events that applies to infections. The chain of events involves several steps – which include the infectious agent, reservoir, entering a susceptible host
infections cannot be cured by antibiotics whereas bacterial infections can.There is a general chain of events that applies to infections. The chain of events involves several steps – which include the infectious agent, reservoir, entering a susceptible host, exit and transmission to new hosts. Each
, eyes, genitalia, anus, or the microbe can enter through open wounds. While a few organisms can grow at the initial site of entry, many migrate and cause systemic infection in different organs. Some pathogens grow within the host cells (intracellular) whereas others grow freely
example of the former is the anaerobic bacteria species, which colonizes the mammalian colon, and an example of the latter are the various species of staphylococcus that exist on human skin. Neither of these colonizations are considered infections. The difference between an infection and a colonization is often only
exist on human skin. Neither of these colonizations are considered infections. The difference between an infection and a colonization is often only a matter of circumstance. Non-pathogenic organisms can become pathogenic given specific conditions, and even the most virulent organism requires certain circumstances to cause a compromising
speeding wound healing.The variables involved in the outcome of a host becoming inoculated by a pathogen and the ultimate outcome include:the route of entry of the pathogen and the access to host regions that it gainsthe intrinsic virulence of the particular organismthe quantity or load of the initial inoculantthe
Because it is normal to have bacterial colonization, it is difficult to know which chronic wounds can be classified as infected and how much risk of progression exists. Despite the huge number of wounds seen in clinical practice, there are limited quality data for evaluated symptoms and signs. A
, it is difficult to know which chronic wounds can be classified as infected and how much risk of progression exists. Despite the huge number of wounds seen in clinical practice, there are limited quality data for evaluated symptoms and signs. A review of chronic wounds in the Journal of
chronic wounds in the Journal of the American Medical Association's "Rational Clinical Examination Series" quantified the importance of increased pain as an indicator of infection. The review showed that the most useful finding is an increase in the level of pain [likelihood ratio (LR) range,
quantified the importance of increased pain as an indicator of infection. The review showed that the most useful finding is an increase in the level of pain [likelihood ratio (LR) range, 11–20] makes infection much more likely, but the absence of pain (negative likelihood ratio
an increase in the level of pain [likelihood ratio (LR) range, 11–20] makes infection much more likely, but the absence of pain (negative likelihood ratio range, 0.64–0.88) does not rule out infection (summary LR 0.64–0.88).Disease can arise if the host's protective immune
the host's protective immune mechanisms are compromised and the organism inflicts damage on the host. Microorganisms can cause tissue damage by releasing a variety of toxins or destructive enzymes. For example, Clostridium tetani releases a toxin that paralyzes muscles, and staphylococcus releases toxins that produce shock and sepsis
staphylococcus releases toxins that produce shock and sepsis. Not all infectious agents cause disease in all hosts. For example, less than 5% of individuals infected with polio develop disease. On the other hand, some infectious agents are highly virulent. The prion causing mad cow disease and
A typical example is the herpes virus, which tends to hide in nerves and become reactivated when specific circumstances arise.Persistent infections cause millions of deaths globally each year. Chronic infections by parasites account for a high morbidity and mortality in many underdeveloped countries.For infecting organisms to survive
such as by sharing a drinking glass or a cigarette.Transmission by direct contact, Some diseases that are transmissible by direct contact include athlete's foot, impetigo and wartsVehicle transmission, transmission by an inanimate reservoir (food, water, soil).Vertical transmission, directly from the mother to an
a microbe in a community, and other epidemiological considerations. Given sufficient effort, all known infectious agents can be specifically identified. The benefits of identification, however, are often greatly outweighed by the cost, as often there is no specific treatment, the cause is obvious, or
the culture of infectious agents isolated from a patient. Culture allows identification of infectious organisms by examining their microscopic features, by detecting the presence of substances produced by pathogens, and by directly identifying an organism by its genotype. Other techniques (such as X-rays, CAT scans
and indicative of a disease and are called pathognomonic signs; but these are rare. Not all infections are symptomatic.In children the presence of cyanosis, rapid breathing, poor peripheral perfusion, or a petechial rash increases the risk of a serious infection by greater than 5 fold.
grown on nutrient agar, a form of solid medium that supplies carbohydrates and proteins necessary for growth of a bacterium, along with copious amounts of water. A single bacterium will grow into a visible mound on the surface of the plate called a colony, which may be separated from
. Bacteriological plates such as these are commonly used in the clinical identification of infectious bacterium. Microbial culture may also be used in the identification of viruses: the medium, in this case, being cells grown in culture that the virus can infect, and then alter or kill.
conjunction with biochemical staining techniques, and can be made exquisitely specific when used in combination with antibody based techniques. For example, the use of antibodies made artificially fluorescent (fluorescently labeled antibodies) can be directed to bind to and identify a specific antigens present on a pathogen. A
or crystal violet allows a microscopist to describe its size, shape, internal and external components and its associations with other cells. The response of bacteria to different staining procedures is used in the taxonomic classification of microbes as well. Two methods, the Gram stain and the acid-
, internal and external components and its associations with other cells. The response of bacteria to different staining procedures is used in the taxonomic classification of microbes as well. Two methods, the Gram stain and the acid-fast stain, are the standard approaches used to classify bacteria and
well. Two methods, the Gram stain and the acid-fast stain, are the standard approaches used to classify bacteria and to diagnosis of disease. The Gram stain identifies the bacterial groups Firmicutes and Actinobacteria, both of which contain many significant human pathogens. The acid-fast
metabolic or enzymatic products characteristic of a particular infectious agent. Since bacteria ferment carbohydrates in patterns characteristic of their genus and species, the detection of fermentation products is commonly used in bacterial identification. Acids, alcohols and gases are usually detected in these tests when bacteria are grown in selective
identification. Acids, alcohols and gases are usually detected in these tests when bacteria are grown in selective liquid or solid media.The isolation of enzymes from infected tissue can also provide the basis of a biochemical diagnosis of an infectious disease. For example, humans can make neither RNA
antigen, usually a protein or carbohydrate made by an infectious agent, is bound by the antibody. This binding then sets off a chain of events that can be visibly obvious in various ways, dependent upon the test. For example, "Strep throat" is often diagnosed within
ways, dependent upon the test. For example, "Strep throat" is often diagnosed within minutes, and is based on the appearance of antigens made by the causative agent, S. pyogenes, that is retrieved from a patient's throat with a cotton swab. Serological tests,
within minutes, and is based on the appearance of antigens made by the causative agent, S. pyogenes, that is retrieved from a patient's throat with a cotton swab. Serological tests, if available, are usually the preferred route of identification, however the tests are costly to
pyogenes, that is retrieved from a patient's throat with a cotton swab. Serological tests, if available, are usually the preferred route of identification, however the tests are costly to develop and the reagents used in the test often require refrigeration. Some serological methods are extremely costly
basic antibody – antigen binding as the basis to produce an electro-magnetic or particle radiation signal, which can be detected by some form of instrumentation. Signal of unknowns can be compared to that of standards allowing quantitation of the target antigen. To aid in the diagnosis of infectious
binding as the basis to produce an electro-magnetic or particle radiation signal, which can be detected by some form of instrumentation. Signal of unknowns can be compared to that of standards allowing quantitation of the target antigen. To aid in the diagnosis of infectious diseases, immunoassays can
by secondary reactions linked to the antibody – antigen binding. Instrumentation can control sampling, reagent use, reaction times, signal detection, calculation of results, and data management to yield a cost-effective automated process for diagnosis of infectious disease.Technologies based upon the polymerase chain reaction
effective automated process for diagnosis of infectious disease.Technologies based upon the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method will become nearly ubiquitous gold standards of diagnostics of the near future, for several reasons. First, the catalog of infectious agents has grown to the point that virtually all of
grow within the human body to cause disease; essentially it must amplify its own nucleic acids in order to cause a disease. This amplification of nucleic acid in infected tissue offers an opportunity to detect the infectious agent by using PCR. Third, the essential tools for directing PCR,
ability to detect any infectious agent rapidly and specifically are currently available. The only remaining blockades to the use of PCR as a standard tool of diagnosis are in its cost and application, neither of which is insurmountable. The diagnosis of a few diseases will not benefit from the development
of the infectious agent does not occur, this limits the ability of PCR to detect the presence of any bacteria.Given the wide range of bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens that cause debilitating and life-threatening illness, the ability to quickly identify the cause of infection is
wide range of bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens that cause debilitating and life-threatening illness, the ability to quickly identify the cause of infection is important yet often challenging. For example, more than half of cases of encephalitis, a severe illness affecting the brain, remain
life-threatening illness, the ability to quickly identify the cause of infection is important yet often challenging. For example, more than half of cases of encephalitis, a severe illness affecting the brain, remain undiagnosed, despite extensive testing using state-of-the-art clinical
threatening illness, the ability to quickly identify the cause of infection is important yet often challenging. For example, more than half of cases of encephalitis, a severe illness affecting the brain, remain undiagnosed, despite extensive testing using state-of-the-art clinical laboratory methods
rather than using primers for a specific infectious agent. This amplification step is followed by next-generation sequencing and alignment comparisons using large databases of thousands of organismic and viral genomes.Metagenomic sequencing could prove especially useful for diagnosis when the patient is immunocompromised. An ever-wider array
wider array of infectious agents can cause serious harm to individuals with immunosuppression, so clinical screening must often be broader. Additionally, the expression of symptoms is often atypical, making clinical diagnosis based on presentation more difficult. Thirdly, diagnostic methods that rely on the detection of antibodies are
the expression of symptoms is often atypical, making clinical diagnosis based on presentation more difficult. Thirdly, diagnostic methods that rely on the detection of antibodies are more likely to fail. A broad, sensitive test for pathogens that detects the presence of infectious material rather than antibodies is therefore
would not offer the patient any further treatment options. In part, these studies on the appearance of HIV in specific communities permitted the advancement of hypotheses as to the route of transmission of the virus. By understanding how the disease was transmitted, resources could be targeted to the communities
further treatment options. In part, these studies on the appearance of HIV in specific communities permitted the advancement of hypotheses as to the route of transmission of the virus. By understanding how the disease was transmitted, resources could be targeted to the communities at greatest risk in campaigns aimed
reducing the number of new infections. The specific serological diagnostic identification, and later genotypic or molecular identification, of HIV also enabled the development of hypotheses as to the temporal and geographical origins of the virus, as well as a myriad of other hypothesis. The development of molecular diagnostic
virus, as well as a myriad of other hypothesis. The development of molecular diagnostic tools have enabled physicians and researchers to monitor the efficacy of treatment with anti-retroviral drugs. Molecular diagnostics are now commonly used to identify HIV in healthy people long before the onset of illness and
the efficacy of treatment with anti-retroviral drugs. Molecular diagnostics are now commonly used to identify HIV in healthy people long before the onset of illness and have been used to demonstrate the existence of people who are genetically resistant to HIV infection. Thus, while there still is no
Molecular diagnostics are now commonly used to identify HIV in healthy people long before the onset of illness and have been used to demonstrate the existence of people who are genetically resistant to HIV infection. Thus, while there still is no cure for AIDS, there is great therapeutic and predictive
being passed from one person to another. Aseptic technique was introduced in medicine and surgery in the late 19th century and greatly reduced the incidence of infections caused by surgery. Frequent hand washing remains the most important defense against the spread of unwanted organisms. There are other forms of prevention
incidence of infections caused by surgery. Frequent hand washing remains the most important defense against the spread of unwanted organisms. There are other forms of prevention such as avoiding the use of illicit drugs, using a condom, wearing gloves, and having a healthy lifestyle with a balanced diet
. Cooking foods well and avoiding foods that have been left outside for a long time is also important.Antimicrobial substances used to prevent transmission of infections include:antiseptics, which are applied to living tissue/skindisinfectants, which destroy microorganisms found on non-living objects.antibiotics, called prophylactic
applied to living tissue/skindisinfectants, which destroy microorganisms found on non-living objects.antibiotics, called prophylactic when given as prevention rather as treatment of infection. However, long term use of antibiotics leads to resistance of bacteria. While humans do not become immune to antibiotics, the bacteria
destroy microorganisms found on non-living objects.antibiotics, called prophylactic when given as prevention rather as treatment of infection. However, long term use of antibiotics leads to resistance of bacteria. While humans do not become immune to antibiotics, the bacteria does. Thus, avoiding using antibiotics longer
-living objects.antibiotics, called prophylactic when given as prevention rather as treatment of infection. However, long term use of antibiotics leads to resistance of bacteria. While humans do not become immune to antibiotics, the bacteria does. Thus, avoiding using antibiotics longer than necessary helps preventing bacteria
recognize the different characteristics of various diseases. Some critical disease characteristics that should be evaluated include virulence, distance traveled by victims, and level of contagiousness. The human strains of Ebola virus, for example, incapacitate their victims extremely quickly and kill them soon after. As a result
within infected hubs are eliminated (Figure 1). However, infection rates can be drastically reduced if the main focus is on the prevention of transmission jumps between hubs. The use of needle exchange programs in areas with a high density of drug users with HIV is an example of
). However, infection rates can be drastically reduced if the main focus is on the prevention of transmission jumps between hubs. The use of needle exchange programs in areas with a high density of drug users with HIV is an example of the successful implementation of this treatment method.
if the main focus is on the prevention of transmission jumps between hubs. The use of needle exchange programs in areas with a high density of drug users with HIV is an example of the successful implementation of this treatment method. [6] Another example is the use of ring
density of drug users with HIV is an example of the successful implementation of this treatment method. [6] Another example is the use of ring culling or vaccination of potentially susceptible livestock in adjacent farms to prevent the spread of the foot-and-mouth virus in 2001.A general
of potentially susceptible livestock in adjacent farms to prevent the spread of the foot-and-mouth virus in 2001.A general method to prevent transmission of vector-borne pathogens is pest control.In cases where infection is merely suspected, individuals may be quarantined until the incubation period has passed
until the incubation period has passed and the disease manifests itself or the person remains healthy. Groups may undergo quarantine, or in the case of communities, a cordon sanitaire may be imposed to prevent infection from spreading beyond the community, or in the case of protective sequestration, into
a pathogen, such as antibody-initiated complement-dependent bacteriolysis, opsonoization, phagocytosis and killing, as occurs for some bacteria,neutralization of viruses so that these organisms cannot enter cells,or by T lymphocytes, which will kill a cell parasitized by a microorganism.The
of the protective antigens and specific acquired host immune factors is more complete for primary pathogens than for opportunistic pathogens.There is also the phenomenon of herd immunity which offers a measure of protection to those otherwise vulnerable people when a large enough proportion of the population has acquired immunity from certain
host immune factors is more complete for primary pathogens than for opportunistic pathogens.There is also the phenomenon of herd immunity which offers a measure of protection to those otherwise vulnerable people when a large enough proportion of the population has acquired immunity from certain infections.Immune resistance to an infectious
the body, anti-infective drugs can suppress the infection. Several broad types of anti-infective drugs exist, depending on the type of organism targeted; they include antibacterial (antibiotic; including antitubercular), antiviral, antifungal and antiparasitic (including antiprotozoal and antihelminthic) agents.
antibiotic; including antitubercular), antiviral, antifungal and antiparasitic (including antiprotozoal and antihelminthic) agents. Depending on the severity and the type of infection, the antibiotic may be given by mouth or by injection, or may be applied topically. Severe infections of the brain are usually
case there is resistance to one antibiotic. Antibiotics only work for bacteria and do not affect viruses. Antibiotics work by slowing down the multiplication of bacteria or killing the bacteria. The most common classes of antibiotics used in medicine include penicillin, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, macrolides, quinolones and
for bacteria and do not affect viruses. Antibiotics work by slowing down the multiplication of bacteria or killing the bacteria. The most common classes of antibiotics used in medicine include penicillin, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, macrolides, quinolones and tetracyclines.Not all infections require treatment, and for many
stewardship is the concept that healthcare providers should treat an infection with an antimicrobial that specifically works well for the target pathogen for the shortest amount of time and to only treat when there is a known or highly suspected pathogen that will respond to the medication.In 2010, about 10
collects information on global deaths by International Classification of Disease (ICD) code categories. The following table lists the top infectious disease by number of deaths in 2002. 1993 data is included for comparison.The top three single agent/disease killers are HIV/AIDS, TB and
data is included for comparison.The top three single agent/disease killers are HIV/AIDS, TB and malaria. While the number of deaths due to nearly every disease have decreased, deaths due to HIV/AIDS have increased fourfold. Childhood diseases include pertussis, poliomyelitis,
and diarrheal deaths. In 2012, approximately 3.1 million people have died due to lower respiratory infections, making it the number 4 leading cause of death in the world.With their potential for unpredictable and explosive impacts, infectious diseases have been major actors in human history. A pandemic
. The plague reduced the old world population from an estimated 450 million to between 350 and 375 million in the 14th century.The introduction of smallpox, measles, and typhus to the areas of Central and South America by European explorers during the 15th and 16th centuries caused pandemics among
Mexico to fall from 20 million to 3 million.The first European influenza epidemic occurred between 1556 and 1560, with an estimated mortality rate of 20%.Smallpox killed an estimated 60 million Europeans during the 18th century (approximately 400,000 per year). Up to 30% of those infected,
18th century (approximately 400,000 per year). Up to 30% of those infected, including 80% of the children under 5 years of age, died from the disease, and one-third of the survivors went blind.In the 19th century, tuberculosis killed an estimated
deaths in France were still caused by TB.The Influenza Pandemic of 1918 (or the Spanish flu) killed 25–50 million people (about 2% of world population of 1.7 billion). Today Influenza kills about 250,000 to 500,000 worldwide each year.In most cases, microorganisms live in harmony
.Several human activities have led to the emergence of zoonotic human pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, protozoa, and rickettsia, and spread of vector-borne diseases, see also globalization and disease and wildlife disease:Encroachment on wildlife habitats. The construction of new villages and housing
The introduction of new crops attracts new crop pests and the microbes they carry to farming communities, exposing people to unfamiliar diseases.The destruction of rain forests. As countries make use of their rain forests, by building roads through forests and clearing areas for settlement or commercial ventures,
and clearing areas for settlement or commercial ventures, people encounter insects and other animals harboring previously unknown microorganisms.Uncontrolled urbanization. The rapid growth of cities in many developing countries tends to concentrate large numbers of people into crowded areas with poor sanitation. These conditions foster transmission of contagious diseases
insects and other animals harboring previously unknown microorganisms.Uncontrolled urbanization. The rapid growth of cities in many developing countries tends to concentrate large numbers of people into crowded areas with poor sanitation. These conditions foster transmission of contagious diseases.Modern transport. Ships and other cargo carriers often harbor
in his account of the plague of Athens, that diseases could spread from an infected person to others. In his On the Different Types of Fever (c. AD 175), the Greco-Roman physician Galen speculated that plagues were spread by "certain seeds of plague",
the Different Types of Fever (c. AD 175), the Greco-Roman physician Galen speculated that plagues were spread by "certain seeds of plague", which were present in the air. In the Sushruta Samhita, the ancient Indian physician Sushruta theorized: "Leprosy, fever
, and the use of same clothes, garlands and pastes." This book has been dated to about the sixth century BC.A basic form of contagion theory was proposed by Persian physician Ibn Sina (known as Avicenna in Europe) in The Canon of Medicine (1025), which
own early contagion theory. He mentioned that people can transmit disease to others by breath, noted contagion with tuberculosis, and discussed the transmission of disease through water and dirt. The concept of invisible contagion was later discussed by several Islamic scholars in the Ayyubid Sultanate who referred to them
hypothesised that infectious diseases were caused by "minute bodies" and described how they can be transmitted through garments, vessels and earrings. Ideas of contagion became more popular in Europe during the Renaissance, particularly through the writing of the Italian physician Girolamo Fracastoro. Anton van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723
in Europe during the Renaissance, particularly through the writing of the Italian physician Girolamo Fracastoro. Anton van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) advanced the science of microscopy by being the first to observe microorganisms, allowing for easy visualization of bacteria.In the mid-19th century John Snow and William Budd did
Girolamo Fracastoro. Anton van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) advanced the science of microscopy by being the first to observe microorganisms, allowing for easy visualization of bacteria.In the mid-19th century John Snow and William Budd did important work demonstrating the contagiousness of typhoid and cholera through contaminated water. Both
to observe microorganisms, allowing for easy visualization of bacteria.In the mid-19th century John Snow and William Budd did important work demonstrating the contagiousness of typhoid and cholera through contaminated water. Both are credited with decreasing epidemics of cholera in their towns by implementing measures to prevent contamination of water
century John Snow and William Budd did important work demonstrating the contagiousness of typhoid and cholera through contaminated water. Both are credited with decreasing epidemics of cholera in their towns by implementing measures to prevent contamination of water. Louis Pasteur proved beyond doubt that certain diseases are caused by infectious agents
contagiousness of typhoid and cholera through contaminated water. Both are credited with decreasing epidemics of cholera in their towns by implementing measures to prevent contamination of water. Louis Pasteur proved beyond doubt that certain diseases are caused by infectious agents, and developed a vaccine for rabies. Robert Koch,
broad spectrum synthetic antibacterial drugs.The medical treatment of infectious diseases falls into the medical field of Infectious Disease and in some cases the study of propagation pertains to the field of Epidemiology. Generally, infections are initially diagnosed by primary care physicians or internal medicine specialists. For example,
from infectious diseases. Another example is that poor socioeconomic factors may ultimately in part be due to high pathogen load preventing economic development.Evidence of infection in fossil remains is a subject of interest for paleopathologists, scientists who study occurrences of injuries and illness in extinct life forms. Signs
poor socioeconomic factors may ultimately in part be due to high pathogen load preventing economic development.Evidence of infection in fossil remains is a subject of interest for paleopathologists, scientists who study occurrences of injuries and illness in extinct life forms. Signs of infection have been discovered in the bones
to high pathogen load preventing economic development.Evidence of infection in fossil remains is a subject of interest for paleopathologists, scientists who study occurrences of injuries and illness in extinct life forms. Signs of infection have been discovered in the bones of carnivorous dinosaurs. When present, however,
infection in fossil remains is a subject of interest for paleopathologists, scientists who study occurrences of injuries and illness in extinct life forms. Signs of infection have been discovered in the bones of carnivorous dinosaurs. When present, however, these infections seem to tend to be confined to only
. Scientists who studied the skull speculated that the bite marks were received in a fight with another Herrerasaurus. Other carnivorous dinosaurs with documented evidence of infection include Acrocanthosaurus, Allosaurus, Tyrannosaurus and a tyrannosaur from the Kirtland Formation. The infections from both tyrannosaurs were received by being bitten during
virulence". More recently, in 2017, bacteria were found to be more resistant to antibiotics and to thrive in the near-weightlessness of space. Microorganisms have been observed to survive the vacuum of outer space.European Center for Disease Prevention and ControlU.S. Centers for Disease Control and
may be birth defects resulting from errors during development of the embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information
embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information or providing regulatory functions at somatic sites.Extragonadal GCTs were
classes reflect an important clinical difference. Compared to germinomatous tumors, nongerminomatous tumors tend to grow faster, have an earlier mean age at time of diagnosis ( around 25 years versus 35 years, in the case of testicular cancers), and have a lower five-year survival rate
radiation, and they also respond well to chemotherapy.  The prognosis for nongerminomatous tumours has improved dramatically, however, due to the use of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens.Mixed germ cell tumors occur in many forms.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal
.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal sinus tumor.Teratocarcinoma refers to a germ cell tumor that is a mixture of teratoma with embryonal carcinoma, or with choriocarcinoma, or with both.  This kind of mixed germ cell tumor may be known simply as
neonates, infants, and children younger than 4 years, most are sacrococcygeal teratomas.Males with Klinefelter syndrome have a 50 times greater risk of GSTs.  In these persons, GSTs usually contain nonseminomatous elements, present at an earlier age, and seldom are gonadal in location.
are being evaluated for tumors that do not respond to chemotherapy.The 1997 International Germ Cell Consensus Classification is a tool for estimating the risk of relapse after treatment of malignant germ-cell tumor.A small study of ovarian tumors in girls reports a correlation between cystic and benign tumors
can be estimated by ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan before surgery, this permits selection of the most appropriate surgical plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found
plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found that for 454 men with nonseminomatous (nongerminomatous) GCTs diagnosed between 1975 and 1989, five-year survival increased over
disorder characterized by endocrine neoplastic features involving endocrine glands that overlap with those involved in MEN1 or MEN2.Percentages in the table below refer to the percentage of people with the MEN type who develop the neoplasia type.*- of patients with MEN1 and gastrinomaFMTC = familial medullary thyroid cancerMEN 2B is sometimes known as
with those involved in MEN1 or MEN2.Percentages in the table below refer to the percentage of people with the MEN type who develop the neoplasia type.*- of patients with MEN1 and gastrinomaFMTC = familial medullary thyroid cancerMEN 2B is sometimes known as MEN 3 and the designation varies by institution (c.f.
of ten exons, spanning about 10 kb, and encodes a 610 amino acid protein named menin. The first exon and the last part of exon 10 are not translated. A main transcript of 2.8 kb has been described in a large variety of human tissues (pancreas, thymus
47%) (47-51). Human and mouse MEN1 amino acid sequences share 95.8% identity and 98.4% similarity. Analysis of menin amino acid sequence did not reveal homologies to any other known human or mammalian protein, sequence motif, or signal peptide. The absence
or mammalian protein, sequence motif, or signal peptide. The absence of significant homology to any other protein complicates efforts to elucidate the functions of menin.MEN1 follows Knudson’s “two-hit” model for tumor suppressor gene carcinogenesis (30). The first hit is a
heterozygous for MEN1 mutations. In this family, there was no difference in disease history between the homozygous and heterozygous mutation carriers.Fifty percent of patients develop signs and symptoms by 20 years of age and more than 95% have symptoms by 40 years of age. There is significant
there was no difference in disease history between the homozygous and heterozygous mutation carriers.Fifty percent of patients develop signs and symptoms by 20 years of age and more than 95% have symptoms by 40 years of age. There is significant intra- and inter-familial variability in the age
mutation carriers.Fifty percent of patients develop signs and symptoms by 20 years of age and more than 95% have symptoms by 40 years of age. There is significant intra- and inter-familial variability in the age of onset, severity of disease, and tumor types. Despite
age and more than 95% have symptoms by 40 years of age. There is significant intra- and inter-familial variability in the age of onset, severity of disease, and tumor types. Despite numerous studies, no genotype-phenotype correlations have been established, suggesting that unknown
95% have symptoms by 40 years of age. There is significant intra- and inter-familial variability in the age of onset, severity of disease, and tumor types. Despite numerous studies, no genotype-phenotype correlations have been established, suggesting that unknown genetic and environmental modifiers
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is a rare hereditary endocrine cancer syndrome characterized primarily by tumors of the parathyroid glands (95% of cases), endocrine gastroenteropancreatic (GEP) tract (30-80% of cases), and anterior pituitary (15-90%
characterized primarily by tumors of the parathyroid glands (95% of cases), endocrine gastroenteropancreatic (GEP) tract (30-80% of cases), and anterior pituitary (15-90% of cases). Other endocrine and non-endocrine neoplasms including adrenocortical and thyroid
cases), endocrine gastroenteropancreatic (GEP) tract (30-80% of cases), and anterior pituitary (15-90% of cases). Other endocrine and non-endocrine neoplasms including adrenocortical and thyroid tumors, visceral and cutaneous lipomas, meningiomas, facial angiofibromas and
gene mutations can be identified in 70-95% of MEN1 patients.Many endocrine tumors in MEN1 are benign and cause symptoms by overproduction of hormones or local mass effects, while other MEN1 tumors are associated with an elevated risk for malignancy. About one third of patients affected with
symptoms by overproduction of hormones or local mass effects, while other MEN1 tumors are associated with an elevated risk for malignancy. About one third of patients affected with MEN1 will die early from an MEN1-related cancer or associated malignancy. Entero-pancreatic gastrinomas and thymic and bronchial carcinoids
will die early from an MEN1-related cancer or associated malignancy. Entero-pancreatic gastrinomas and thymic and bronchial carcinoids are the leading cause of morbidity and mortality. Consequently, the average age of death in untreated individuals with MEN1 is significantly lower (55.4 years for men and 46.8
associated malignancy. Entero-pancreatic gastrinomas and thymic and bronchial carcinoids are the leading cause of morbidity and mortality. Consequently, the average age of death in untreated individuals with MEN1 is significantly lower (55.4 years for men and 46.8 years for women) than that of the general population
' for MEN 1 and 'Sipple syndrome' for MEN 2.In 1974 Sizemore et al. showed that the MEN 2 category included two groups of patients with MTC and pheochromocytoma: one with parathyroid disease and a normal appearance (MEN 2A) and the other without parathyroid disease but with
may be birth defects resulting from errors during development of the embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information
embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information or providing regulatory functions at somatic sites.Extragonadal GCTs were
classes reflect an important clinical difference. Compared to germinomatous tumors, nongerminomatous tumors tend to grow faster, have an earlier mean age at time of diagnosis ( around 25 years versus 35 years, in the case of testicular cancers), and have a lower five-year survival rate
radiation, and they also respond well to chemotherapy.  The prognosis for nongerminomatous tumours has improved dramatically, however, due to the use of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens.Mixed germ cell tumors occur in many forms.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal
.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal sinus tumor.Teratocarcinoma refers to a germ cell tumor that is a mixture of teratoma with embryonal carcinoma, or with choriocarcinoma, or with both.  This kind of mixed germ cell tumor may be known simply as
neonates, infants, and children younger than 4 years, most are sacrococcygeal teratomas.Males with Klinefelter syndrome have a 50 times greater risk of GSTs.  In these persons, GSTs usually contain nonseminomatous elements, present at an earlier age, and seldom are gonadal in location.
are being evaluated for tumors that do not respond to chemotherapy.The 1997 International Germ Cell Consensus Classification is a tool for estimating the risk of relapse after treatment of malignant germ-cell tumor.A small study of ovarian tumors in girls reports a correlation between cystic and benign tumors
can be estimated by ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan before surgery, this permits selection of the most appropriate surgical plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found
plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found that for 454 men with nonseminomatous (nongerminomatous) GCTs diagnosed between 1975 and 1989, five-year survival increased over
is a subtype and one of the most aggressive of the diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. PCNSLs represent around 20% of all cases of lymphomas in HIV infections. (Other types are Burkitt's lymphomas and immunoblastic lymphomas). Primary CNS lymphoma is highly associated with Epstein-
those with AIDS and those immunosuppressed), and does not have a predilection for any particular age group. Mean CD4+ count at time of diagnosis is ~50/uL.  In immunocompromised patients, prognosis is usually poor.  In immunocompetent patients (that is, patients who do
of the depth of the tumour. Treatment with irradiation and corticosteroids often only produces a partial response and tumour recurs in more than 90% of patients. Median survival is 10 to 18 months in immunocompetent patients, and less in those with AIDS. The addition of IV methotrexate and
, median survival time may increase beyond 4 years.  However, radiation is not recommended in conjunction with methotrexate because of an increased risk of leukoencephalopathy and dementia in patients older than 60.  In AIDS patients, perhaps the most important factor with respect to treatment is the use
to treatment is the use of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART), which affects the CD4+ lymphocyte population and the level of immunosuppression. The optimal treatment plan for patients with PCNSL has not been determined. Combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy at least doubles survival time, but
PCNSL has not been determined. Combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy at least doubles survival time, but causes dementia and leukoencephalopathy in at least 50% of patients who undergo it. The most studied chemotherapeutic agent in PCNSL is methotrexate (a folate analogue that interferes with DNA repair). Methotrexate
the responses were complete.The initial response to radiotherapy is often excellent, and may result in a complete remission. However, the duration of response with radiotherapy alone remains short, with median survival after treatment with radiotherapy just 18 months. Methotrexate based chemotherapy markedly improves survival, with

cancer that develops from the lining of the stomach. Most cases of stomach cancers are gastric carcinomas, which can be divided into a number of subtypes including gastric adenocarcinomas. Lymphomas and mesenchymal tumors may also develop in the stomach. Early symptoms may include heartburn, upper abdominal pain,
adenocarcinomas. Lymphomas and mesenchymal tumors may also develop in the stomach. Early symptoms may include heartburn, upper abdominal pain, nausea and loss of appetite. Later signs and symptoms may include weight loss, yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes, vomiting, difficulty swallowing and
of the abdomen and lymph nodes.The most common cause is infection by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori, which accounts for more than 60% of cases. Certain types of H. pylori have greater risks than others. Smoking, dietary factors such as pickled vegetables and obesity are other risk
nodes.The most common cause is infection by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori, which accounts for more than 60% of cases. Certain types of H. pylori have greater risks than others. Smoking, dietary factors such as pickled vegetables and obesity are other risk factors. About 10%
H. pylori have greater risks than others. Smoking, dietary factors such as pickled vegetables and obesity are other risk factors. About 10% of cases run in families, and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such
as pickled vegetables and obesity are other risk factors. About 10% of cases run in families, and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Most of the time, stomach cancer
10% of cases run in families, and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Most of the time, stomach cancer develops in stages over years. Diagnosis is usually by biopsy
Japan and South Korea, two countries that have high rates of the disease, screen for stomach cancer.A Mediterranean diet lowers the risk of stomach cancer, as does the stopping of smoking. There is tentative evidence that treating H. pylori decreases the future risk. If stomach cancer
have high rates of the disease, screen for stomach cancer.A Mediterranean diet lowers the risk of stomach cancer, as does the stopping of smoking. There is tentative evidence that treating H. pylori decreases the future risk. If stomach cancer is treated early, it can be cured
that treating H. pylori decreases the future risk. If stomach cancer is treated early, it can be cured. Treatments may include some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and targeted therapy. If treated late, palliative care may be advised. Some types of lymphoma can be
include some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and targeted therapy. If treated late, palliative care may be advised. Some types of lymphoma can be cured by eliminating H. pylori. Outcomes are often poor, with a less than 10% five-year survival rate in
it is over 65% and Japan over 70%, partly due to screening efforts.Globally, stomach cancer is the fifth leading type of cancer and the third leading cause of death from cancer, making up 7% of cases and 9% of deaths. In 2018,
over 70%, partly due to screening efforts.Globally, stomach cancer is the fifth leading type of cancer and the third leading cause of death from cancer, making up 7% of cases and 9% of deaths. In 2018, it newly occurred in 1.03 million people
.Globally, stomach cancer is the fifth leading type of cancer and the third leading cause of death from cancer, making up 7% of cases and 9% of deaths. In 2018, it newly occurred in 1.03 million people and caused 783,000 deaths. Before the 1930s,
is the fifth leading type of cancer and the third leading cause of death from cancer, making up 7% of cases and 9% of deaths. In 2018, it newly occurred in 1.03 million people and caused 783,000 deaths. Before the 1930s, in much of the world
caused 783,000 deaths. Before the 1930s, in much of the world, including most Western developed countries, it was the most common cause of death from cancer. Rates of death have been decreasing in many areas of the world since then. This is believed to be due to
1930s, in much of the world, including most Western developed countries, it was the most common cause of death from cancer. Rates of death have been decreasing in many areas of the world since then. This is believed to be due to the eating of less salted and
the world since then. This is believed to be due to the eating of less salted and pickled foods as a result of the development of refrigeration as a method of keeping food fresh. Stomach cancer occurs most commonly in East Asia and Eastern Europe. It occurs twice as often
(heartburn). However, fewer than 1 in every 50 people referred for endoscopy due to indigestion has cancer. Abdominal discomfort and loss of appetite, especially for meat, can occur.Gastric cancers that have enlarged and invaded normal tissue can cause weakness, fatigue, bloating of
a result of many factors. It occurs twice as commonly in males as females. Estrogen may protect women against the development of this form of cancer.Helicobacter pylori infection is an essential risk factor in 65–80% of gastric cancers, but only 2% of people with Helicobacter infections
development of this form of cancer.Helicobacter pylori infection is an essential risk factor in 65–80% of gastric cancers, but only 2% of people with Helicobacter infections develop stomach cancer. The mechanism by which H. pylori induces stomach cancer potentially involves chronic inflammation, or the action of
of people with Helicobacter infections develop stomach cancer. The mechanism by which H. pylori induces stomach cancer potentially involves chronic inflammation, or the action of H. pylori virulence factors such as CagA. It was estimated that Epstein–Barr virus is responsible for 84,000 cases per year. AIDS is also
foods, salt and salt-rich foods, red meat, processed meat, pickled vegetables, and bracken are associated with a higher risk of stomach cancer. Nitrates and nitrites in cured meats can be converted by certain bacteria, including H. pylori, into compounds that have been found
to cause stomach cancer in animals.Fresh fruit and vegetable intake, citrus fruit intake, and antioxidant intake are associated with a lower risk of stomach cancer. A Mediterranean diet is associated with lower rates of stomach cancer, as is regular aspirin use.Obesity is a physical risk
, citrus fruit intake, and antioxidant intake are associated with a lower risk of stomach cancer. A Mediterranean diet is associated with lower rates of stomach cancer, as is regular aspirin use.Obesity is a physical risk factor that has been found to increase the risk of gastric adenocarcinoma
found to increase more than 2 times for an obese person. There is a correlation between iodine deficiency and gastric cancer.About 10% of cases run in families and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as
There is a correlation between iodine deficiency and gastric cancer.About 10% of cases run in families and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.A genetic risk factor for gastric cancer
About 10% of cases run in families and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.A genetic risk factor for gastric cancer is a genetic defect of the CDH1 gene known as hereditary
mutation, gastric cancer develops through a mechanism that is not fully understood. This mutation is considered autosomal dominant meaning that half of a carrier's children will likely experience the same mutation. Diagnosis of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer usually takes place when at least two cases involving a family member
, pernicious anemia, chronic atrophic gastritis, Menetrier's disease (hyperplastic, hypersecretory gastropathy), and intestinal metaplasia.To find the cause of symptoms, the doctor asks about the patient's medical history, does a physical exam, and may order laboratory studies. The patient may
, and may order laboratory studies. The patient may also have one or all of the following exams:Gastroscopic exam is the diagnostic method of choice. This involves insertion of a fibre optic camera into the stomach to visualise it.Upper GI series (may be called barium roentgenogram).Computed
roentgenogram).Computed tomography or CT scanning of the abdomen may reveal gastric cancer. It is more useful to determine invasion into adjacent tissues or the presence of spread to local lymph nodes. Wall thickening of more than 1 cm that is focal, eccentric and enhancing favours malignancy.In 2013,
to check for the presence of cancerous cells. A biopsy, with subsequent histological analysis, is the only sure way to confirm the presence of cancer cells.Various gastroscopic modalities have been developed to increase yield of detected mucosa with a dye that accentuates the cell structure and can identify
cells.Various gastroscopic modalities have been developed to increase yield of detected mucosa with a dye that accentuates the cell structure and can identify areas of dysplasia. Endocytoscopy involves ultra-high magnification to visualise cellular structure to better determine areas of dysplasia. Other gastroscopic modalities such as optical coherence
that accentuates the cell structure and can identify areas of dysplasia. Endocytoscopy involves ultra-high magnification to visualise cellular structure to better determine areas of dysplasia. Other gastroscopic modalities such as optical coherence tomography are being tested investigationally for similar applications.A number of cutaneous conditions are associated with
tripe palms (a similar darkening hyperplasia of the skin of the palms) and the Leser-Trelat sign, which is the rapid development of skin lesions known as seborrheic keratoses.Various blood tests may be done including a complete blood count (CBC) to check for anaemia,
. Often, it associates intestinal metaplasia in neighbouring mucosa. Depending on glandular architecture, cellular pleomorphism and mucosecretion, adenocarcinoma may present 3 degrees of differentiation: well, moderate and poorly differentiated. Diffuse type adenocarcinoma (mucinous, colloid, linitis plastica or leather-bottle stomach) tumour
linitis plastica or leather-bottle stomach) tumour cells are discohesive and secrete mucus, which is delivered in the interstitium, producing large pools of mucus/colloid (optically "empty" spaces). It is poorly differentiated. If the mucus remains inside the tumour cell, it
B-cell lymphomas (MALT type) and to a lesser extent diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. MALT type make up about half of stomach lymphomas.Carcinoid and stromal tumors may occur.				If cancer cells are found in the tissue sample, the next step is to
tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) may be ordered, as their levels correlate to extent of metastasis, especially to the liver, and the cure rate.Staging may not be complete until after surgery. The surgeon removes nearby lymph
the liver, and the cure rate.Staging may not be complete until after surgery. The surgeon removes nearby lymph nodes and possibly samples of tissue from other areas in the abdomen for examination by a pathologist.The clinical stages of stomach cancer are:Stage 0. Limited to
The surgeon removes nearby lymph nodes and possibly samples of tissue from other areas in the abdomen for examination by a pathologist.The clinical stages of stomach cancer are:Stage 0. Limited to the inner lining of the stomach. Treatable by endoscopic mucosal resection when found very early (
and 18% in Stage III. However, in a high-risk population in the Valdivia Province of southern Chile, only 5% of patients were diagnosed in the first two stages and 10% in stage III.Getting rid of H. pylori in those who are infected decreases the risk
patients were diagnosed in the first two stages and 10% in stage III.Getting rid of H. pylori in those who are infected decreases the risk of stomach cancer, at least in those who are Asian. A 2014 meta-analysis of observational studies found that a diet high in fruits
of observational studies found that a diet high in fruits, mushrooms, garlic, soybeans, and green onions was associated with a lower risk of stomach cancer in the Korean population. Low doses of vitamins, especially from a healthy diet, decrease the risk of stomach cancer. A
, mushrooms, garlic, soybeans, and green onions was associated with a lower risk of stomach cancer in the Korean population. Low doses of vitamins, especially from a healthy diet, decrease the risk of stomach cancer. A previous review of antioxidant supplementation did not find supporting evidence
with a lower risk of stomach cancer in the Korean population. Low doses of vitamins, especially from a healthy diet, decrease the risk of stomach cancer. A previous review of antioxidant supplementation did not find supporting evidence and possibly worse outcomes.Cancer of the stomach is difficult to
pioneered in Japan and is available in the United States at some centers. In this procedure, the tumor, together with the inner lining of stomach (mucosa), is removed from the wall of the stomach using an electrical wire loop through the endoscope. The advantage is that
operation than removing the stomach. Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is a similar technique pioneered in Japan, used to resect a large area of mucosa in one piece. If the pathologic examination of the resected specimen shows incomplete resection or deep invasion by tumor, the patient would need
stomach resection. A 2016 Cochrane review found low quality evidence of no difference in short-term mortality between laparoscopic and open gastrectomy (removal of stomach), and that benefits or harms of laparoscopic gastrectomy cannot be ruled out. Post-operatively, up to 70% of
of stomach), and that benefits or harms of laparoscopic gastrectomy cannot be ruled out. Post-operatively, up to 70% of people undergoing total gastrectomy develop complications such as dumping syndrome and reflux esophagitis. Construction of a "pouch", which serves as a "
as dumping syndrome and reflux esophagitis. Construction of a "pouch", which serves as a "stomach substitute", reduced the incidence of dumping syndrome and reflux esophagitis by 73% and 63% respectively, and led to improvements in quality-of-life, nutritional outcomes
and led to improvements in quality-of-life, nutritional outcomes, and body mass index.Those with metastatic disease at the time of presentation may receive palliative surgery and while it remains controversial, due to the possibility of complications from the surgery itself and the fact that it
mass index.Those with metastatic disease at the time of presentation may receive palliative surgery and while it remains controversial, due to the possibility of complications from the surgery itself and the fact that it may delay chemotherapy the data so far is mostly positive, with improved survival rates being
may delay chemotherapy the data so far is mostly positive, with improved survival rates being seen in those treated with this approach.The use of chemotherapy to treat stomach cancer has no firmly established standard of care. Unfortunately, stomach cancer has not been particularly sensitive to these drugs,
with improved survival rates being seen in those treated with this approach.The use of chemotherapy to treat stomach cancer has no firmly established standard of care. Unfortunately, stomach cancer has not been particularly sensitive to these drugs, and chemotherapy, if used, has usually served to palliatively
in inoperable locally advanced or metastatic gastric carcinoma over-expressing the HER2/neu gene. In particular, HER2 is overexpressed in 13–22% of patients with gastric cancer. Of note, HER2 overexpression in gastric neoplasia is heterogeneous and comprises a minority of tumor cells (less than 10
HER2 is overexpressed in 13–22% of patients with gastric cancer. Of note, HER2 overexpression in gastric neoplasia is heterogeneous and comprises a minority of tumor cells (less than 10% of gastric cancers overexpress HER2 in more than 5% of tumor cells). Hence, this heterogeneous
gastric neoplasia is heterogeneous and comprises a minority of tumor cells (less than 10% of gastric cancers overexpress HER2 in more than 5% of tumor cells). Hence, this heterogeneous expression should be taken into account for HER2 testing, particularly in small samples such as biopsies,
Lymphoma of the MALT type can often be fully treated by treating an underlying H. pylori infection. This results in remission in about 80% of cases.The prognosis of stomach cancer is generally poor, due to the fact the tumour has often metastasised by the time of discovery and
can often be fully treated by treating an underlying H. pylori infection. This results in remission in about 80% of cases.The prognosis of stomach cancer is generally poor, due to the fact the tumour has often metastasised by the time of discovery and the fact that most people
80% of cases.The prognosis of stomach cancer is generally poor, due to the fact the tumour has often metastasised by the time of discovery and the fact that most people with the condition are elderly (median age is between 70 and 75 years) at presentation. The
with 952,000 cases diagnosed in 2012. It is more common both in men and in developing countries. In 2012, it represented 8.5% of cancer cases in men, making it the fourth most-common cancer in men. Also in 2012, the number of deaths was 700,000
represented 8.5% of cancer cases in men, making it the fourth most-common cancer in men. Also in 2012, the number of deaths was 700,000 having decreased slightly from 774,000 in 1990, making it the third-leading cause of cancer-related death (after lung
. Also in 2012, the number of deaths was 700,000 having decreased slightly from 774,000 in 1990, making it the third-leading cause of cancer-related death (after lung cancer and liver cancer).Less than 5% of stomach cancers occur in people under 40 years of age with
774,000 in 1990, making it the third-leading cause of cancer-related death (after lung cancer and liver cancer).Less than 5% of stomach cancers occur in people under 40 years of age with 81.1% of that 5% in the age-group of 30 to 39
leading cause of cancer-related death (after lung cancer and liver cancer).Less than 5% of stomach cancers occur in people under 40 years of age with 81.1% of that 5% in the age-group of 30 to 39 and 18.9% in the age-group of
-group of 30 to 39 and 18.9% in the age-group of 20 to 29.In 2014, stomach cancer resulted in 0.61% of deaths (13,303 cases) in the U.S. In China, stomach cancer accounted for 3.56% of all deaths (324,439 cases). The
13,303 cases) in the U.S. In China, stomach cancer accounted for 3.56% of all deaths (324,439 cases). The highest rate of stomach cancer was in Mongolia, at 28 cases per 100,000 people.In the United Kingdom, stomach cancer is the fifteenth most-common
most-common cancer (around 7,100 people were diagnosed with stomach cancer in 2011), and it is the tenth most-common cause of cancer-related deaths (around 4,800 people died in 2012).Incidence and mortality rates of gastric cancer vary greatly in Africa. The GLOBOCAN system is
types have been reported. Signs vary but may include vomiting (especially if blood is present), weight loss, anemia, and lack of appetite. Bowel movements may be dark and tarry in nature. In order to determine whether cancer is present in the stomach, special X
useful diagnostic tool that can also take samples of the suspected mass for histopathological analysis to confirm or rule out cancer. The most definitive method of cancer diagnosis is through open surgical biopsy. Most stomach tumors are malignant with evidence of spread to lymph nodes or liver, making treatment difficult
confirm or rule out cancer. The most definitive method of cancer diagnosis is through open surgical biopsy. Most stomach tumors are malignant with evidence of spread to lymph nodes or liver, making treatment difficult. Except for lymphoma, surgery is the most frequent treatment option for stomach cancers but
by the chemical suffix -ol for an alcohol) is an organic molecule. It is a sterol (or modified steroid), a type of lipid. Cholesterol is biosynthesized by all animal cells and is an essential structural component of animal cell membranes.Cholesterol also serves as a precursor
a sterol (or modified steroid), a type of lipid. Cholesterol is biosynthesized by all animal cells and is an essential structural component of animal cell membranes.Cholesterol also serves as a precursor for the biosynthesis of steroid hormones, bile acid and vitamin D. Cholesterol is the principal
is biosynthesized by all animal cells and is an essential structural component of animal cell membranes.Cholesterol also serves as a precursor for the biosynthesis of steroid hormones, bile acid and vitamin D. Cholesterol is the principal sterol synthesized by all animals. In vertebrates, hepatic cells typically produce the
synthesizing it by way of a complex 37-step process. This begins with the mevalonate or HMG-CoA reductase pathway, the target of statin drugs, which encompasses the first 18 steps. This is followed by 19 additional steps to convert the resulting lanosterol into cholesterol.A
cholesterol synthesis. For these reasons, cholesterol in food, seven to ten hours after ingestion, has little, if any effect on concentrations of cholesterol in the blood. However, during the first seven hours after ingestion of cholesterol, as absorbed fats are being distributed around the body
after ingestion, has little, if any effect on concentrations of cholesterol in the blood. However, during the first seven hours after ingestion of cholesterol, as absorbed fats are being distributed around the body within extracellular water by the various lipoproteins (which transport all fats in the water
can compete with cholesterol for reabsorption in the intestinal tract, thus potentially reducing cholesterol reabsorption. When intestinal lining cells absorb phytosterols, in place of cholesterol, they usually excrete the phytosterol molecules back into the GI tract, an important protective mechanism. The intake of naturally occurring phytosterols,
membrane remains stable and durable without being rigid, allowing animal cells to change shape and animals to move.The structure of the tetracyclic ring of cholesterol contributes to the fluidity of the cell membrane, as the molecule is in a trans conformation making all but the side chain of cholesterol
ring of cholesterol contributes to the fluidity of the cell membrane, as the molecule is in a trans conformation making all but the side chain of cholesterol rigid and planar. In this structural role, cholesterol also reduces the permeability of the plasma membrane to neutral solutes, hydrogen ions,
for the structure and function of invaginated caveolae and clathrin-coated pits, including caveola-dependent and clathrin-dependent endocytosis. The role of cholesterol in endocytosis of these types can be investigated by using methyl beta cyclodextrin (MβCD) to remove cholesterol from the plasma membrane. Substrate
can be investigated by using methyl beta cyclodextrin (MβCD) to remove cholesterol from the plasma membrane. Substrate presentation Cholesterol regulates the biological process of substrate presentation and the enzymes that use substrate presentation as a mechanism of their activation. (PLD2) is a well-defined example of
substrate presentation. The enzyme is palmitoylated causing the enzyme to traffic to cholesterol dependent lipid domains sometimes called "lipid rafts". The substrate of phospholipase D is phosphatidylcholine (PC) which is unsaturated and is of low abundance in lipid rafts. PC localizes to the disordered region of
to its substrate PC and commences catalysis based on substrate presentation. Signaling Cholesterol is also implicated in cell signaling processes, assisting in the formation of lipid rafts in the plasma membrane, which brings receptor proteins in close proximity with high concentrations of second messenger molecules. In multiple layers,
in close proximity with high concentrations of second messenger molecules. In multiple layers, cholesterol and phospholipids, both electrical insulators, can facilitate speed of transmission of electrical impulses along nerve tissue. For many neuron fibers, a myelin sheath, rich in cholesterol since it is derived from compacted
, a myelin sheath, rich in cholesterol since it is derived from compacted layers of Schwann cell membrane, provides insulation for more efficient conduction of impulses. Demyelination (loss of some of these Schwann cells) is believed to be part of the basis for multiple sclerosis.Cholesterol binds
these Schwann cells) is believed to be part of the basis for multiple sclerosis.Cholesterol binds to and affects the gating of a number of ion channels such as the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, GABAA receptor, and the inward-rectifier potassium channel. Cholesterol also activates the estrogen-
for the receptor. The constitutively active nature of the receptor may be explained by the fact that cholesterol is ubiquitous in the body. Inhibition of ERRα signaling by reduction of cholesterol production has been identified as a key mediator of the effects of statins and bisphosphonates on bone, muscle,
constitutively active nature of the receptor may be explained by the fact that cholesterol is ubiquitous in the body. Inhibition of ERRα signaling by reduction of cholesterol production has been identified as a key mediator of the effects of statins and bisphosphonates on bone, muscle, and macrophages. On the
cholesterol is ubiquitous in the body. Inhibition of ERRα signaling by reduction of cholesterol production has been identified as a key mediator of the effects of statins and bisphosphonates on bone, muscle, and macrophages. On the basis of these findings, it has been suggested that the ERRα should
precursor Within cells, cholesterol is also a precursor molecule for several biochemical pathways. For example, it is the precursor molecule for the synthesis of vitamin D in the calcium metabolism and all steroid hormones, including the adrenal gland hormones cortisol and aldosterone, as well as the sex hormones
rates include the brain, the adrenal glands, and the reproductive organs.Synthesis within the body starts with the mevalonate pathway where two molecules of acetyl CoA condense to form acetoacetyl-CoA. This is followed by a second condensation between acetyl CoA and acetoacetyl-CoA to form 3-
form 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA (HMG-CoA).This molecule is then reduced to mevalonate by the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase. Production of mevalonate is the rate-limiting and irreversible step in cholesterol synthesis and is the site of action for statins (a class of cholesterol-
by the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase. Production of mevalonate is the rate-limiting and irreversible step in cholesterol synthesis and is the site of action for statins (a class of cholesterol-lowering drugs).Mevalonate is finally converted to isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) through two phosphorylation steps and one
. Production of mevalonate is the rate-limiting and irreversible step in cholesterol synthesis and is the site of action for statins (a class of cholesterol-lowering drugs).Mevalonate is finally converted to isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) through two phosphorylation steps and one decarboxylation step that requires ATP.Three molecules of
of cholesterol-lowering drugs).Mevalonate is finally converted to isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) through two phosphorylation steps and one decarboxylation step that requires ATP.Three molecules of isopentenyl pyrophosphate condense to form farnesyl pyrophosphate through the action of geranyl transferase.Two molecules of farnesyl pyrophosphate then condense to form squalene by the
(IPP) through two phosphorylation steps and one decarboxylation step that requires ATP.Three molecules of isopentenyl pyrophosphate condense to form farnesyl pyrophosphate through the action of geranyl transferase.Two molecules of farnesyl pyrophosphate then condense to form squalene by the action of squalene synthase in the endoplasmic reticulum.Oxidosqualene cyclase
steps and one decarboxylation step that requires ATP.Three molecules of isopentenyl pyrophosphate condense to form farnesyl pyrophosphate through the action of geranyl transferase.Two molecules of farnesyl pyrophosphate then condense to form squalene by the action of squalene synthase in the endoplasmic reticulum.Oxidosqualene cyclase then cyclizes squalene to form lanosterol
pyrophosphate condense to form farnesyl pyrophosphate through the action of geranyl transferase.Two molecules of farnesyl pyrophosphate then condense to form squalene by the action of squalene synthase in the endoplasmic reticulum.Oxidosqualene cyclase then cyclizes squalene to form lanosterol.Finally, lanosterol is converted to cholesterol via either of
pathway, or the Kandutsch-Russell pathway.The final 19 steps to cholesterol contain NADPH and oxygen to help oxidize methyl groups for removal of carbons, mutases to move alkene groups, and NADH to help reduce ketones.Konrad Bloch and Feodor Lynen shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology
.Konrad Bloch and Feodor Lynen shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1964 for their discoveries concerning some of the mechanisms and methods of regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism.Biosynthesis of cholesterol is directly regulated by the cholesterol levels present, though the homeostatic mechanisms involved are
Bloch and Feodor Lynen shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1964 for their discoveries concerning some of the mechanisms and methods of regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism.Biosynthesis of cholesterol is directly regulated by the cholesterol levels present, though the homeostatic mechanisms involved are only partly
in Physiology or Medicine in 1964 for their discoveries concerning some of the mechanisms and methods of regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism.Biosynthesis of cholesterol is directly regulated by the cholesterol levels present, though the homeostatic mechanisms involved are only partly understood. A higher intake from food leads
of intracellular cholesterol in the endoplasmic reticulum by the protein SREBP (sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 and 2). In the presence of cholesterol, SREBP is bound to two other proteins: SCAP (SREBP cleavage-activating protein) and INSIG-1. When cholesterol levels fall,
-CoA reductase. The LDL receptor scavenges circulating LDL from the bloodstream, whereas HMG-CoA reductase leads to an increase of endogenous production of cholesterol. A large part of this signaling pathway was clarified by Dr. Michael S. Brown and Dr. Joseph L. Goldstein in the 1970s. In
a cytosolic domain (responsible for its catalytic function) and a membrane domain. The membrane domain senses signals for its degradation. Increasing concentrations of cholesterol (and other sterols) cause a change in this domain's oligomerization state, which makes it more susceptible to destruction by the proteosome
domain. The membrane domain senses signals for its degradation. Increasing concentrations of cholesterol (and other sterols) cause a change in this domain's oligomerization state, which makes it more susceptible to destruction by the proteosome. This enzyme's activity can also be reduced by phosphorylation by an
other sterols) cause a change in this domain's oligomerization state, which makes it more susceptible to destruction by the proteosome. This enzyme's activity can also be reduced by phosphorylation by an AMP-activated protein kinase. Because this kinase is activated by AMP, which is produced
acid, on the other hand, are transported within the fatty hydrophilic core of the lipoprotein, along with triglyceride.There are several types of lipoproteins in the blood. In order of increasing density, they are chylomicrons, very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), intermediate
here to the bloodstream by the liver.VLDL molecules are produced by the liver from triacylglycerol and cholesterol which was not used in the synthesis of bile acids. These molecules contain apolipoprotein B100 and apolipoprotein E in their shells, and can be degraded by lipoprotein lipase on the artery wall
apolipoprotein E in their shells, and can be degraded by lipoprotein lipase on the artery wall to IDL. This arterial wall cleavage allows absorption of triacylglycerol and increases concentration of circulating cholesterol. IDL molecules are then consumed in two processes: half is metabolized by HTGL and taken up by
in the bloodstream until they become cholesterol laden LDL particles.LDL particles are the major blood cholesterol carriers. Each one contains approximately 1,500 molecules of cholesterol ester. LDL molecule shells contain just one molecule of apolipoprotein B100, recognized by LDL receptors in peripheral tissues. Upon binding of apolipoprotein
LDL particles are the major blood cholesterol carriers. Each one contains approximately 1,500 molecules of cholesterol ester. LDL molecule shells contain just one molecule of apolipoprotein B100, recognized by LDL receptors in peripheral tissues. Upon binding of apolipoprotein B100, many LDL receptors concentrate in clathrin-coated pits
membranes.LDL receptors are used up during cholesterol absorption, and its synthesis is regulated by SREBP, the same protein that controls the synthesis of cholesterol de novo, according to its presence inside the cell. A cell with abundant cholesterol will have its LDL receptor synthesis blocked, to
molecules are oxidized and taken up by macrophages, which become engorged and form foam cells. These foam cells often become trapped in the walls of blood vessels and contribute to atherosclerotic plaque formation. Differences in cholesterol homeostasis affect the development of early atherosclerosis (carotid intima-media thickness)
formation. Differences in cholesterol homeostasis affect the development of early atherosclerosis (carotid intima-media thickness). These plaques are the main causes of heart attacks, strokes, and other serious medical problems, leading to the association of so-called LDL cholesterol (actually a lipoprotein)
as the “oxysterol hypothesis”. Additional roles for oxysterols in human physiology include their participation in bile acid biosynthesis, function as transport forms of cholesterol, and regulation of gene transcription.In biochemical experiments radiolabelled forms of cholesterol, such as tritiated-cholesterol are used. These derivatives
”. Additional roles for oxysterols in human physiology include their participation in bile acid biosynthesis, function as transport forms of cholesterol, and regulation of gene transcription.In biochemical experiments radiolabelled forms of cholesterol, such as tritiated-cholesterol are used. These derivatives undergo degradation upon storage and
include their participation in bile acid biosynthesis, function as transport forms of cholesterol, and regulation of gene transcription.In biochemical experiments radiolabelled forms of cholesterol, such as tritiated-cholesterol are used. These derivatives undergo degradation upon storage and it is essential to purify cholesterol prior to use
to purify cholesterol prior to use. Cholesterol can be purified using small Sephadex LH-20 columns.Cholesterol is oxidized by the liver into a variety of bile acids. These, in turn, are conjugated with glycine, taurine, glucuronic acid, or sulfate. A mixture of conjugated and
Approximately 95% of the bile acids are reabsorbed from the intestines, and the remainder are lost in the feces. The excretion and reabsorption of bile acids forms the basis of the enterohepatic circulation, which is essential for the digestion and absorption of dietary fats. Under certain circumstances,
the major constituent of most gallstones (lecithin and bilirubin gallstones also occur, but less frequently). Every day, up to 1 g of cholesterol enters the colon. This cholesterol originates from the diet, bile, and desquamated intestinal cells, and can be metabolized by the colonic
cholesterol is a steroid generally associated with mammals, the human pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis is able to completely degrade this molecule and contains a large number of genes that are regulated by its presence. Many of these cholesterol-regulated genes are homologues of fatty acid β-oxidation genes, but
β-oxidation genes, but have evolved in such a way as to bind large steroid substrates like cholesterol.Animal fats are complex mixtures of triglycerides, with lesser amounts of both the phospholipids and cholesterol molecules from which all animal (and human) cell membranes are constructed. Since
cell membranes are constructed. Since all animal cells manufacture cholesterol, all animal-based foods contain cholesterol in varying amounts. Major dietary sources of cholesterol include red meat, egg yolks and whole eggs, liver, kidney, giblets, fish oil, and butter. Human breast milk
, egg yolks and whole eggs, liver, kidney, giblets, fish oil, and butter. Human breast milk also contains significant quantities of cholesterol.Plant cells synthesize cholesterol as a precursor for other compounds, such as phytosterols and steroidal glycoalkaloids, with cholesterol remaining in plant foods
for absorption in the intestines, reduce the absorption of both dietary and bile cholesterol. A typical diet contributes on the order of 0.2 gram of phytosterols, which is not enough to have a significant impact on blocking cholesterol absorption. Phytosterols intake can be supplemented through the use of phytosterol
gram of phytosterols, which is not enough to have a significant impact on blocking cholesterol absorption. Phytosterols intake can be supplemented through the use of phytosterol-containing functional foods or dietary supplements that are recognized as having potential to reduce levels of LDL-cholesterol.In 2016, the
Phytosterols intake can be supplemented through the use of phytosterol-containing functional foods or dietary supplements that are recognized as having potential to reduce levels of LDL-cholesterol.In 2016, the United States Department of Agriculture Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee recommended that Americans eat as little dietary cholesterol as
are rich in cholesterol are also high in saturated fat and thereby may increase the risk of cardiovascular disease.Some supplemental guidelines have recommended doses of phytosterols in the 1.6–3.0 grams per day range (Health Canada, EFSA, ATP III, FDA). A recent meta-analysis demonstrating
per day. However, the benefits of a diet supplemented with phytosterols have also been questioned.According to the lipid hypothesis, elevated levels of cholesterol in the blood lead to atherosclerosis which may increase the risk of heart attack, stroke, and peripheral artery disease. Since higher blood
have also been questioned.According to the lipid hypothesis, elevated levels of cholesterol in the blood lead to atherosclerosis which may increase the risk of heart attack, stroke, and peripheral artery disease. Since higher blood LDL – especially higher LDL concentrations and smaller LDL particle size – contributes
Elevated levels of the lipoprotein fractions, LDL, IDL and VLDL, rather than the total cholesterol level, correlate with the extent and progress of atherosclerosis. Conversely, the total cholesterol can be within normal limits, yet be made up primarily of small LDL and small HDL particles,
which conditions atheroma growth rates are high. A post hoc analysis of the IDEAL and the EPIC prospective studies found an association between high levels of HDL cholesterol (adjusted for apolipoprotein A-I and apolipoprotein B) and increased risk of cardiovascular disease, casting doubt on the cardioprotective role
such as statins, fibrates, cholesterol absorption inhibitors, nicotinic acid derivatives or bile acid sequestrants. There are several international guidelines on the treatment of hypercholesterolaemia.Human trials using HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, known as statins, have repeatedly confirmed that changing lipoprotein transport patterns from unhealthy to
with cholesterol values currently considered low for adults. Studies have shown that reducing LDL cholesterol levels by about 38.7 mg/dL with the use of statins can reduce cardiovascular disease and stroke risk by about 21%. Studies have also found that statins reduce atheroma progression. As a result
cholesterol, 200–239 mg/dL borderline-high, > 240 mg/dL high cholesterol. The American Heart Association provides a similar set of guidelines for total (fasting) blood cholesterol levels and risk for heart disease: Statins are effective in lowering LDL cholesterol and widely used for
cholesterol to HDL—another useful measure—of far less than 5:1 is thought to be healthier.Total cholesterol is defined as the sum of HDL, LDL, and VLDL. Usually, only the total, HDL, and triglycerides are measured. For cost reasons, the VLDL
The estimated VLDL and LDL have more error when triglycerides are above 400 mg/dL.In the Framingham Heart Study, in subjects over 50 years of age, they found an 11% increase overall and 14% increase in cardiovascular disease mortality per 1 mg/dL per year drop in
link between LDL and mortality, or that lower LDL was linked to a higher mortality risk, especially in older adults.Abnormally low levels of cholesterol are termed hypocholesterolemia. Research into the causes of this state is relatively limited, but some studies suggest a link with depression, cancer
by a doctor, or a home cholesterol-monitoring device is used to measure a lipid profile, an approach used to estimate a person's lipoproteins, the vastly more important issue because lipoproteins have always been concordant with outcomes though the lipid profile is commonly discordant LDL Particle Number and
values less than 1 mmol/L (40 mg/dL), or there are other drivers heart disease and stroke. Additional drivers of heart disease include diabetes mellitus, hypertension (or use of anti-hypertensive medication), low HDL level, family history of coronary artery
monoclonal antibody or portion thereof. The exception to this rule is the disorder termed non-secretory multiple myeloma; this disorder is a form of plasma cell dyscrasia in which no myeloma protein is detected in serum or urine (at least as determined by conventional laboratory methods) of individuals
in clonal bone marrow plasma cells and/or evidence of clonal plasma cell-mediated tissue injury (e.g. plasmacytoma tumors). Here, a clone of plasma cells refers to group of plasma cells that are abnormal in that they have an identical genetic identity and therefore are descendants of a single
and/or evidence of clonal plasma cell-mediated tissue injury (e.g. plasmacytoma tumors). Here, a clone of plasma cells refers to group of plasma cells that are abnormal in that they have an identical genetic identity and therefore are descendants of a single genetically distinct ancestor cell.At
single genetically distinct ancestor cell.At one end of this spectrum of hematological disorders, detection of one of these myeloma proteins in an individual's blood or urine is due to a common and clinically silent disorder termed MGUS, i.e. monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance. At the other end
-associated neoplasm, that has developed, often in a stepwise manner, from their MGUS precursors.The clinical importance of understanding this spectrum of diseases is that it can be used to: a) advise individuals on the likelihood of their condition progressing to a malignant phase; b
) arm of human chromosome 14 at position 32.33 (notated as 14q32.33) and the immunoglobulin light chain antigen binding locus on the q arm of chromosome 22 at position 11.2 (i.e. 22 q11.2) by processes termed V(D)J recombination, somatic hypermutation, and immunoglobulin class switching.  These
expression, respectively, of genes that control cell growth and/or survival. In consequence of these "primary genomic changes", an expanding clone of cells develops; overproduces and secretes a monoclonal IgM, IgG, IgA, IgE, or IgD antibody, a κ or λ light chain
become malignant. The overproduced monoclonal proteins, termed myeloma proteins, commonly circulate in blood, may accumulate in urine, and are the hallmarks of plasma cell dyscrasias including their most malignant forms viz., multiple myeloma, light chain multiple myeloma, and plasma cell leukemia. IgG-
. IgE-secretory multiple myeloma has been reported in <50 cases as of 2013 and is characteristically associated with translocations between the q arms of chromosome 11 and 14, i.e. t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocations.In other cases, plasma cells and/or lymphoplasmacytoid cells (a type of B cell resembling
the q arms of chromosome 11 and 14, i.e. t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocations.In other cases, plasma cells and/or lymphoplasmacytoid cells (a type of B cell resembling, and possible precursor to, plasma cells) suffer other kinds of mutations that lead to the production of an IgM myeloma
cases, plasma cells and/or lymphoplasmacytoid cells (a type of B cell resembling, and possible precursor to, plasma cells) suffer other kinds of mutations that lead to the production of an IgM myeloma protein. Overproduction of this myeloma protein may progress to a different form of plasma cell
other kinds of mutations that lead to the production of an IgM myeloma protein. Overproduction of this myeloma protein may progress to a different form of plasma cell/lymphoplasmacytoid cell malignancy, Waldenström macroglobulinaemia. Genetic mutations thought to be involved in the development and/or progression of the latter disease include
apoptosis (e.g. CIDEC, TP52, ATM, KRAS, NRAS, Wnt, and NF-κB). In the most malignant form of plasma cell dyscrasias, primary plasma cell leukemia, the plasma cell population contains >1900 distinct DNA alterations in >600 genes.In general
free heavy chain, shortened version of these proteins, or any combination of these proteins) in blood and/or urine as defined by various types of gel electrophoresis. Obviously, the latter criterion does not apply to the rare cases of true non-secretory myeloma.Myeloma proteins form as
. Obviously, the latter criterion does not apply to the rare cases of true non-secretory myeloma.Myeloma proteins form as a result of gene mutations rather than physiological gene remodeling responses to an instigating foreign antigen: typically these proteins are non-functional. However, they  
termed MGUS, is diagnosed in individuals who exhibit a serum IgG, IgD, IgA, or IgE monoclonal protein with or without increased levels of blood and/or urine free κ or λ light chains. These patients typically also show small increases in bone marrow plasma cells. Further requirements for
100, providing that the higher light chain concentration is >100 milligram/liter; and e) a circulating blood plasma cell absolute count of <2x109 and/or <20% of total circulating nucleated cells. Presence of any one of the latter findings indicates that the plasma cell dyscrasia
findings indicates that the plasma cell dyscrasia has progressed beyond the MGUS stage.Non-IgM MGUS is a relatively stable condition afflicting 3% of people aged 50 and 5% of people aged 70; on average, it progresses to multiple myeloma at a rate of 0.5-1
has progressed beyond the MGUS stage.Non-IgM MGUS is a relatively stable condition afflicting 3% of people aged 50 and 5% of people aged 70; on average, it progresses to multiple myeloma at a rate of 0.5-1% cases per year, as defined
MGUS associated with non-IgG myeloma proteins or with serum myeloma protein levels greater than 15 gram/liter had a greater risk per year of progression to multiple myeloma. A Spanish study group found that MGUS patients demonstrating aneuploidy (i.e. abnormal number of chromosomes) in bone marrow cells
had a greater risk per year of progression to multiple myeloma. A Spanish study group found that MGUS patients demonstrating aneuploidy (i.e. abnormal number of chromosomes) in bone marrow cells or >95% of resident bone marrow plasma cells that are clonal in nature also have a greater risk
in bone marrow cells or >95% of resident bone marrow plasma cells that are clonal in nature also have a greater risk per year of progression to myeloma. In a more recent study, MGUS patients that had the presence of none, 1, 2, or 3 of
in nature also have a greater risk per year of progression to myeloma. In a more recent study, MGUS patients that had the presence of none, 1, 2, or 3 of the three following risk factors, serum M protein levels >15 gram/liter, a
within 20 years. In another study, MGUS patients with none, 1, or 2 of the following risk factors, >95% of bone marrow plasma cells that are clonal in nature and a 10% or greater rise in the levels of their monoclonal proteins within 3 years
years, had 2, 16, and 72% risks, respectively, of progression within 7 years. However, estimates on the risks of progression for some of these parameters are tentative and subject to change. For example, the IgA form of MGUS, while once considered to
36% in IgM MGUS, 82% in IgM-related malignancies). It is clear that each cell type contributes to different features of IgM malignancies but not clear that clonal plasma cells are critical to the development or progression of IgM MGUS. In all events, IgM MGUS
30 gram/liter; have less than 10% of nucleated bone marrow cells with the lymphoplasmacytic morphology, and have no symptoms or findings of end organ dysfunction attributed to Waldenström's macroglobulinemia such as anemia, decreases in any white blood cell count, cold agglutinin disease, hyperviscosity of
of end organ dysfunction attributed to Waldenström's macroglobulinemia such as anemia, decreases in any white blood cell count, cold agglutinin disease, hyperviscosity of blood, lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, peripheral neuropathy, cryoglobulinemia, or constitutional symptoms.There may be a modest increase in the incidence
of the CRAB criteria, b)have a bone marrow plasma cell count that is <10% of nucleated cells, c) show no evidence of amyloid deposition (see Light chain deposition disease), and d) accumulate less than 0.5 grams of the monoclonal light chain in their urine
light chain multiple myeloma at the very slow rate of 0.3 cases per 100 years.Some early studies have reported that a very rapid rate of progression occurs in light chain MGUS patients who have free light chain κ/λ or λ/κ ratios equal to or greater than 100
/κ ratios equal to or greater than 100 (i.e. and κ/λ ratio outside of 0.02 to 100). About 80% of individuals bearing these light chain ratios were found to progress to light chain multiple myeloma within 2 years. In consequence, these individuals were recommended
of: 1) a disorder meeting the criteria for MGUS; b) decreased kidney function as evidence by, e.g. a Glomerular filtration rate of <40; and c) biopsy confirmed or suspicion of cast nephropathy, glomerulonephritis, of other morphological expressions of clonal immunoglobulin-induced kidney
Increased excretion of a urinary monoclonal light chain (typically >0.5 gram/day), which suggests the presence of a particularly severe form of kidney injury (myeloma cast nephropathy), supports but is not a requirement for the diagnosis of MGRS. The disorder can also be caused
associated with a monoclonal immunoglobulin or C4 dense deposit disease associated with a monoclonal immunoglobulin. Diagnosis depends or identifying these other syndromes and the identification of complement components on kidney biopsy.Regardless of the exact pathophysiology causing monoclonal immunoglobulin-induced kidney injury, MGRS has a greater morbidity and mortality
of MGUS. Since renal dysfunction usually improves with therapy directed at the underlying plasma cell dyscrasia, MGRS may warrant treatment even when other parameters of plasma cell dyscrasia severity (e.g. low levels of serum monoclonal immunoglobulin and bone marrow plasma cells) suggest the presence of minimal, non-
therapy directed at the underlying plasma cell dyscrasia, MGRS may warrant treatment even when other parameters of plasma cell dyscrasia severity (e.g. low levels of serum monoclonal immunoglobulin and bone marrow plasma cells) suggest the presence of minimal, non-malignant disease.Smoldering multiple myeloma or SMM (
, non-malignant disease.Smoldering multiple myeloma or SMM (also termed smoldering myeloma) is the next stage following MGUS in the spectrum of plasma cell dyscrasias. While still considered a pre-malignant condition, its chances of progressing to a malignant plasma cell dyscrasia are generally greater
progression of their corresponding MGUS subtypes. Non-IgM SMM Non-IgM SMM (also termed IgG and IgA SMM because of the rarity of IgD and IgE SMM) is diagnosed in asymptomatic individuals based on criteria identical to those listed above for Non-IgM MGUS except that:
gram/liter and/or a bone marrow lymphoplasmacytoid cell infilatrate >10% of total nucleated cells. These cases should have no symptoms or findings of end organ dysfunction attributed to Waldenström's macroglobulinemia such as anemia, decreases in any white blood cell count, cold agglutinin disease, hyperviscosity of
of end organ dysfunction attributed to Waldenström's macroglobulinemia such as anemia, decreases in any white blood cell count, cold agglutinin disease, hyperviscosity of blood, lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, peripheral neuropathy, cryoglobulinemia, or constitutional symptoms.As determined by a Mayo Clinic study of 48
splenomegaly, peripheral neuropathy, cryoglobulinemia, or constitutional symptoms.As determined by a Mayo Clinic study of 48 individuals, smoldering Waldenström's macroglobulinemia's risk of progression to Waldenström's macroglobulinemia is estimated to be ~12% per year and then falling of sharply for at least the next 5
peripheral neuropathy, cryoglobulinemia, or constitutional symptoms.As determined by a Mayo Clinic study of 48 individuals, smoldering Waldenström's macroglobulinemia's risk of progression to Waldenström's macroglobulinemia is estimated to be ~12% per year and then falling of sharply for at least the next 5 years to
least the next 5 years to 2% per year. In this study the only factor predictive of a more rapid progress was a finding of anemia (hemoglobin level <115 grams/liter). During a 15-year follow-up, the Clinic subsequently reported that patients
Oncology Group in a study on 231 individuals reported that the smoldering disease progressed to overt Waldenström's macroglobulinemia over 9 years in only 26% of cases. Light chain SMM Light chain smoldering multiple myeloma (light chain SMM) was previously termed idiopathic Bence Jones proteinuria. The condition is
damage attributable to the myeloma proteins or plasma cells.In a Mayo clinic study of 101 individuals with light chain SMM, the cumulative probability of progression to active multiple myeloma or light-chain amyloidosis in patients with light-chain SMM was 28%, 45%, and 56
and 56% after 5, 10, and 15 years, respectively. The major risk factors for progression were the level of urinary excretion of M protein, percentage of bone marrow plasma cells, and immunoparesis (i.e. reduced serum levels of intact immunoglobulins).Serious and potentially life-threatening paraneoplastic
, 10, and 15 years, respectively. The major risk factors for progression were the level of urinary excretion of M protein, percentage of bone marrow plasma cells, and immunoparesis (i.e. reduced serum levels of intact immunoglobulins).Serious and potentially life-threatening paraneoplastic complications can occur in plasma
cells, thereby causing potentially cataclysmic organ failures. There are 31 types of circulating proteins that can become misfolded and lead to distinctly different types of amyloidosis; among these, myeloma proteins, particularly free light chains, are the predominant cause of the disease. Increases in the levels of
light chains, are the predominant cause of the disease. Increases in the levels of free κ or λ light chains are a common feature of plasma cell dyscrasias. These increases occur in: 40% of IgM MGUS, IgM SMM, and Waldenstroms macroglbulonemia cases; 60% to
in the levels of free κ or λ light chains are a common feature of plasma cell dyscrasias. These increases occur in: 40% of IgM MGUS, IgM SMM, and Waldenstroms macroglbulonemia cases; 60% to 70% of non-secretory multiple myelom cases;  90
of intact immunoglobulin multiple myeloma cases; and, by definition, 100% of light chain multiple myeloma cases. There are two different types of plasma cell dyscrasia-associated amyloidosis syndromes: amyloid light chain amyloidosis (AL amyloidosis) in which amyloid deposits consist of free light chains and
with AH amyloidosis. AL Amyloidosis AL amyloidosis can occur at any stage in the plasma cell dyscrasia spectrum. Typically, patients developing this type of amyloidosis have had excess κ or λ free light chains in their urine for years before diagnosis. At diagnosis, however, they typically have
burden (bone marrow plasma cells <5% to 7% of total nucleated cells) and in only <5% to 10% of cases do other findings indicate the presence of a malignant condition (i.e. definitive signs of multiple myeloma, Waldenström's macroglobulinemia, or chronic lymphocytic
evidence serious involvement of the kidney (proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome) or heart (restrictive cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias) in 70% or 60% of cases, respectively, and of dysfunction in the peripheral nervous system (numbness, parathesias) or autonomic nervous system (orthostatic hypotension) in
of dysfunction in the peripheral nervous system (numbness, parathesias) or autonomic nervous system (orthostatic hypotension) in 20% or 15% of cases, respectively. They may also exhibit evidence of liver involvement (liver failure, increases in circulating liver enzymes, bleeding due to factor
parathesias) or autonomic nervous system (orthostatic hypotension) in 20% or 15% of cases, respectively. They may also exhibit evidence of liver involvement (liver failure, increases in circulating liver enzymes, bleeding due to factor X deficiency), gastrointestinal track deficiencies (malabsorption)
(macroglossia, shoulder pad masses, cutaneous nodules). Arthritis in multiple joints, often manifested before diagnosis, is also a common feature of AL amyloidosis and has led to initial misdiagnoses of rheumatoid arthritis. Diagnosis of the disease requires evidence of increased levels of a κ or λ
of a κ or λ myeloma protein in blood and/or blood, presence of an amyloid-related organ-involvement syndrome, detection in tissues of amyloid deposition based on birefringence-staining with Congo red, and detection in tissues of κ or λ deposition based on electron microscopy or mass
electron microscopy or mass spectrometry. Reflecting the widespread systemic nature of the disease, patient median survival is only 8 months dating from the time of diagnosis. Treatment commonly improves this poor survival. In a Mayo Clinic study, for example, AL amyloidosis assigned stage 1, 2,
AHL amyloidosis cases are ~17-fold less common than AL amyloidosis cases. The disease often presents late in its course with signs and/or symptoms of kidney failure such as those associated with the nephrotic syndrome and is therefore treated as a malignant condition. In a small study of 16 patients
also known as Crow–Fukase syndrome, Takatsuki disease, or PEP syndrome) is a rare and complex medical syndrome that involves a combination of syndrome-defining signs and symptoms due to the dysfunction of multiple organs. The syndrome is associated with a plasma cell dyscrasia in almost 100
-defining signs and symptoms due to the dysfunction of multiple organs. The syndrome is associated with a plasma cell dyscrasia in almost 100% of cases, pathological overexpression of certain cytokines in >95% of cases, and the lymphoproliferative disorder termed Castleman's disease in ~15% of
. The syndrome is associated with a plasma cell dyscrasia in almost 100% of cases, pathological overexpression of certain cytokines in >95% of cases, and the lymphoproliferative disorder termed Castleman's disease in ~15% of cases. (Rare cases of POEMS have been associated with polyclonal
of cases, pathological overexpression of certain cytokines in >95% of cases, and the lymphoproliferative disorder termed Castleman's disease in ~15% of cases. (Rare cases of POEMS have been associated with polyclonal rather than clonal plasma cells; these cases are not plasma cell dyscrasias but
presence of; both of two major criteria, peripheral neuropathy and a clonal plasma cell dyscrasia (increased bone marrow plasma cells in ~67% of cases; ≥1 plasmacytoma in ~33% of cases); at least one other major criteria (Castleman's disease, sclerotic bone lesions,
, peripheral neuropathy and a clonal plasma cell dyscrasia (increased bone marrow plasma cells in ~67% of cases; ≥1 plasmacytoma in ~33% of cases); at least one other major criteria (Castleman's disease, sclerotic bone lesions, elevated serum levels of the cytokine VEGF)
[i.e. thrombocytosis or polycythemia]). The monoclonal protein in POEMS patients is typically identified as IgA or IgG which in >95% of cases contains a λ chain that is restricted to either of two members of the V lambda 1 subfamily viz., IGLV1-40*
in the V lambda family). That is, the myeloma protein in POEMS is almost invariably a clonal λ light chain variant. Deletion of chromosome 13 and chromosomal translocations but not increases in chromosome number have also been reported to occur in POEMS patients.Patients with 1 or 2
also been reported to occur in POEMS patients.Patients with 1 or 2 isolated plasmacytomas have been successfully treated with targeted radiotherapy to obtain relief of symptoms and sometimes complete remission of disease. (Isolated plasmacytomas may regress spontaineously.) Patients with >2 plasmacytomas or symptomatic disseminated disease have
POEMS patients.Patients with 1 or 2 isolated plasmacytomas have been successfully treated with targeted radiotherapy to obtain relief of symptoms and sometimes complete remission of disease. (Isolated plasmacytomas may regress spontaineously.) Patients with >2 plasmacytomas or symptomatic disseminated disease have been treated with chemotherapy often followed
by autologous stem-cell transplantation; these treatments have been found to reduce symptoms of the disease and lead to long-term partial remissions of disease.The overall survival of POEMS patients who have been treated for their disease is relatively good for a disease occurring in patients with an
patients without these or other identifiable conditions. Non-essential cryoglobulonemia is classified into three types. Type 1 cryoglobulinemia (10-25% of cases) involves a circulating myeloma protein, typically IgM or IgG but in rare case reports IgA. The condition is associated with Waldenström macroglobulinemia or
myeloma protein, typically IgM or IgG but in rare case reports IgA. The condition is associated with Waldenström macroglobulinemia or multiple myeloma in ~40% of type I cases, the MGUS or smoldering predecessors to these diseases in ~44% of type I cases, and other B cell lymphoproliferative disorders
associated with Waldenström macroglobulinemia or multiple myeloma in ~40% of type I cases, the MGUS or smoldering predecessors to these diseases in ~44% of type I cases, and other B cell lymphoproliferative disorders in ~16% of type I cases. Type II cryglobulinemia (50-60%
, the MGUS or smoldering predecessors to these diseases in ~44% of type I cases, and other B cell lymphoproliferative disorders in ~16% of type I cases. Type II cryglobulinemia (50-60% of cases) involves circulating IgM myeloma protein with rheumatoid factor activity and therefore
type I cases, and other B cell lymphoproliferative disorders in ~16% of type I cases. Type II cryglobulinemia (50-60% of cases) involves circulating IgM myeloma protein with rheumatoid factor activity and therefore bound to polyclonal IgG and protein components of the blood complement system;
rarely, hepatitis B virus or human immunodeficiency virus infections are the major causes of this cryoglobulinemia. Type III cryoglobulinemia (15-30% of cases) involves circulating polyclonal IgM protein with rheumatoid factor activity bound to polyclonal IgG and blood complement components; autoimmune diseases and, less commonly
IgG and blood complement components; autoimmune diseases and, less commonly, hepatitis virus C infection or lymphoproliferative disorders are the cause of this type of croglobulinemia. Only types I and II are defined as plasma cell dyscrasias.Patients suffering type 1 cryoglobulinemia present with symptoms due to cold temperature
are defined as plasma cell dyscrasias.Patients suffering type 1 cryoglobulinemia present with symptoms due to cold temperature-induce blood hyperviscosity and consequential interruptions of blood flow, e.g. skin lesions (lower extremity purpuric spots and papules, acrocyanosis, necrosis skin ulcers, livedo reticularis urticaria), peripheral
(lower extremity purpuric spots and papules, acrocyanosis, necrosis skin ulcers, livedo reticularis urticaria), peripheral neuropathy, blurred vision, loss of vision, hearing loss, headaches, confusion, transient ischemic attacks, chest pain, heart failure, glomerulonephritis, kidney failure, oral bleeding
typically exhibit levels of a myeloma protein >5 gram/liter and can be diagnosed by simple observing the temperature-induced, reversible induction of serum precipitate formation. Patients, particularly those with catastrophic presentations, are treated with plasma exchange and/or plasmapharesis to reduce the load of circulating myeloma
the CD20 antigen or the proteasome inhibitor, Bortezomib.Patients suffering type II (or type III) cryoglobulinemia present with many of the symptoms of type I disease plus those of inflammatory vasculitis. Their treatments are tailored to the underlying infectious, autoimmune, or malignant disease. Type II
cells or other types of clonal B cells, are typically treated with regimens used for Walsdenstorms macroglobulonemia or multiple myeloma.In the malignant stage of plasma cell dyscrasias, a clearly excessive tumor cell burden causes symptoms and findings predictive of rapid, life-threatening progression of disease. These
the malignant stage of plasma cell dyscrasias, a clearly excessive tumor cell burden causes symptoms and findings predictive of rapid, life-threatening progression of disease. These dyscrasias fall into several distinct categories. Solitary plasmacytoma Solitary plasmacytoma is an early stage malignancy with a clinical course that lies between
distinct categories. Solitary plasmacytoma Solitary plasmacytoma is an early stage malignancy with a clinical course that lies between MGUS and multiple myeloma in the spectrum of plasma cell dyscrasias. Solitary plasmacytomas typically present with local symptoms due to the growing mass of plasma cells such as the bone pain or pathologic
lies between MGUS and multiple myeloma in the spectrum of plasma cell dyscrasias. Solitary plasmacytomas typically present with local symptoms due to the growing mass of plasma cells such as the bone pain or pathologic bone fractures occurring in solitary plasmacytomas of bone or the headache, focal neurological deficits, and
typically present with local symptoms due to the growing mass of plasma cells such as the bone pain or pathologic bone fractures occurring in solitary plasmacytomas of bone or the headache, focal neurological deficits, and cranial nerve palsies occurring in extramedullary plasmacytomas of sellar and parasellar compartments of the brain.
1,691 cases in the US, the median age at diagnosis was 63 with males representing ~60% of all cases. The most common site of plasmacytoma involvement was bone (~58%) followed by upper or lower airway tract (~16%), soft tissue or connective tissue (
plasmacytoma with minimal bone marrow involvement is more likely to progress, i.e. it recurs or becomes overt multiple myeloma in 20% to 60% of cases within 3 years. Solitary plasmacytomas associated with 10% or more plasma cells are diagnosed as overt multiple myeloma. Non-secretory multiple
10% or more plasma cells are diagnosed as overt multiple myeloma. Non-secretory multiple myeloma Non-secretory multiple myeloma represents a class of plasma cell dyscrasias where no myeloma protein is detected in serum or urine of patients with evidence of increased clonal bone marrow plasma cells and/or multiple
-secretory multiple myeloma Non-secretory multiple myeloma represents a class of plasma cell dyscrasias where no myeloma protein is detected in serum or urine of patients with evidence of increased clonal bone marrow plasma cells and/or multiple plasmacytomas, particularly of the bone but also of soft tissues. While a
possibly of plasma cell origin. The condition has been diagnosed based on biopsy-proved clonal plasma cell tumors and/or the presence in bone marrow of plasma cells at ≥10% of nucleated cells in individuals who have evidence of end organ damage attributable to an underlying plasma cell disorder. These
-proved clonal plasma cell tumors and/or the presence in bone marrow of plasma cells at ≥10% of nucleated cells in individuals who have evidence of end organ damage attributable to an underlying plasma cell disorder. These patients typically also show one or more CRAB signs and lack evidence of a
. However, more sensitive methods of detecting urinary and serum light chain myeloma proteins using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays indicate that >60% of cases initially diagnosed as non-secretory multiple myeloma had abnormal levels of either a clonal κ or λ light chain in their urine or serum
to be cases primarily of light chain multiple myeloma but on occasion "false non-secretors", i.e. cases in which there is evidence of myeloma protein secretion such as renal myeloma protein deposits.A Mayo Clinic study of 124 patients initially diagnosed as having non-secretory multiple myeloma
these patients response to therapy, time to disease recurrence, and overall survival were similar to typical myeloma patients. However, in a subset of patients diagnosed after 2001 and therefore treated with more effective therapy that included autologous stem-cell transplantation, prognosis was significantly better in non-
elderly (median age of 74, range 42–91 years old) males (51 of 66 case reports) and commonly present with a combination of symptoms related to chronic lymphocytic leukemia symptoms (fatigue, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, enlargements of liver and/or spleen and lymphadenopathy) plus symptoms of multiple
66 case reports) and commonly present with a combination of symptoms related to chronic lymphocytic leukemia symptoms (fatigue, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, enlargements of liver and/or spleen and lymphadenopathy) plus symptoms of multiple myelomas. Patients exhibit two distinct populations of clonal cells in their bone marrow, blood
plasma cell-derived myeloma proteins, either IgG, IgA, or free light chain in ~50%, 20%, and 20% of cases, respectively, but may also have a second myeloma protein made by the lymphocytic cells, either an IgM or IgG. Signs and symptoms
IgG. Signs and symptoms of chronic lymphocytic leukemia commonly precede those of multiple myeloma, sometimes by years. The relationship(s) between the two clones of cells in this combined disease has not been established although one study suggests that the clonal plasma cells and clonal lymphocytes arise from a common hematological
or IgE myeloma protein in their serum and/or a clonal κ or λ light chain in their serum or urine plus either one of two sets of criteria. In the first criteria set, patients must have ≥10% bone marrow clonal plasma cells plus ≥1 of the CRAB criteria; in
chain concentration must be ≥100 milligrams/liter), and/or >1 focal bone lesion on magnetic resonance imaging. The 5 year medium survival of patients with multiple meyeloma treated with currently used treatment regements is 48.5%. Light chain multiple myeloma Light chain multiple myeloma is diagnosed in patients
having the lower concentration being present at >10 milligrams/liter) regardless of the stage of their plasma cell dyscrasia. At the time of diagnosis, 30% to 50% of light chain multiple myeloma patients have severe renal dysfunction or kidney failure due to light chain myeloma cast
form of multiple myeloma in which significant numbers of typically immature appearing plasma cells, i.e. plasmablasts, circulate in the blood. Very small numbers of plasma cells may reach the circulation in non-IgM multiple myeloma, non-IgM SMM, and, exceptionally, non-IgM MGUS
% circulating plasma cells had a prognosis much worse than that for multiple myeloma and similar to that for plasma cell leukemia. Flow cytometry immunophenotyping of blood cells to detect clonal phenotypes of plasma cells seen in multiple myeloma (e.g. the CD138+, CD38+, CD19−, CD4+/- phenotype
much worse than that for multiple myeloma and similar to that for plasma cell leukemia. Flow cytometry immunophenotyping of blood cells to detect clonal phenotypes of plasma cells seen in multiple myeloma (e.g. the CD138+, CD38+, CD19−, CD4+/- phenotype) may be a more sensitive method
, CD4+/- phenotype) may be a more sensitive method to enumerate circulating clonal plasma cells and diagnose plasma cell leukemia.There are two forms of plasma cell leukemia: Primary plasma cell leukemia in which patients without a history of multiple myeloma present with diagnostically high levels of circulating plasma cells
of multiple myeloma present with diagnostically high levels of circulating plasma cells and Secondary plasma cell leukemia in which patients with multiple myeloma suffer their dyscrasia's progression by the expansion of large numbers of their malignant plasma cells into the circulation and distant tissues. Historically, primary plasma cell leukemia was
tendencies secondary to thrombocytopenia, and pleural effusions. They are less likely than multiple myeloma patients to have lytic bone lesions. In several studies of patients with either form of plasma cell leukemia, the disease was associated with clonal IgG in 28% to 56% of cases, IgA
and pleural effusions. They are less likely than multiple myeloma patients to have lytic bone lesions. In several studies of patients with either form of plasma cell leukemia, the disease was associated with clonal IgG in 28% to 56% of cases, IgA in 4% to 7
In several studies of patients with either form of plasma cell leukemia, the disease was associated with clonal IgG in 28% to 56% of cases, IgA in 4% to 7% of cases, and a light chain in 23% to 44% of cases; 0
cell leukemia, the disease was associated with clonal IgG in 28% to 56% of cases, IgA in 4% to 7% of cases, and a light chain in 23% to 44% of cases; 0-12% of patients had no myeloma protein.
to 56% of cases, IgA in 4% to 7% of cases, and a light chain in 23% to 44% of cases; 0-12% of patients had no myeloma protein. Medium survival for primary and secondary plasma cell dyscrasias have been 7–13 months
in 4% to 7% of cases, and a light chain in 23% to 44% of cases; 0-12% of patients had no myeloma protein. Medium survival for primary and secondary plasma cell dyscrasias have been 7–13 months and 2–7 months, respectively, but
, however, these diseases have very different clinical differences. Furthermore, each of the heavy chain diseases appears to be due to rare variants of lymphoma and therefore is sometimes regarded as a B cell dyscrasia However, heavy chain diseases are still often classified with plasma cell dyscrasias. The
commonly, the respiratory tract with signs and symptoms of respiratory dysfunction. Involved tissues usually include mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues and evidence a histology of lymphoplasmacytoid infiltrates accompanied by large numbers of plasma cells and small lymphocytes. The plasma cells therein express the monoclonal α chain and therefore are clonal
and symptoms of respiratory dysfunction. Involved tissues usually include mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues and evidence a histology of lymphoplasmacytoid infiltrates accompanied by large numbers of plasma cells and small lymphocytes. The plasma cells therein express the monoclonal α chain and therefore are clonal in nature and the sole or contributing
chain and therefore are clonal in nature and the sole or contributing producer of the α chain myeloma protein. Some 57% to 66% of patients present with disseminated lymphoma, 17% to 36% of patients present with a localized lymphoma, and 9% to 17% of
producer of the α chain myeloma protein. Some 57% to 66% of patients present with disseminated lymphoma, 17% to 36% of patients present with a localized lymphoma, and 9% to 17% of patients lack any evidence of a lymphoplasmacytic neoplasm. A majority of
of patients present with disseminated lymphoma, 17% to 36% of patients present with a localized lymphoma, and 9% to 17% of patients lack any evidence of a lymphoplasmacytic neoplasm. A majority of the latter patients have an autoimmune disease or a chronic infection which may be
patients, and that long-term (>6 months) appropriately selected antibiotic therapy has improved the condition in 33% to 71% of patients who are at an early stage of the disease and documented to be infected. However, these patients frequently relapse. Patients resistant to
disease (also termed Franklin disease or Franklin's disease) presents in three patterns: a) aggressive lymphoma (57% to 66% of cases) associated with constitutional symptoms and in 50% of cases with enlargement of lymph nodes, spleen, and/or liver; b) localized
presents in three patterns: a) aggressive lymphoma (57% to 66% of cases) associated with constitutional symptoms and in 50% of cases with enlargement of lymph nodes, spleen, and/or liver; b) localized lymphoma (~25% of cases) with lymphoma limited to
: a) aggressive lymphoma (57% to 66% of cases) associated with constitutional symptoms and in 50% of cases with enlargement of lymph nodes, spleen, and/or liver; b) localized lymphoma (~25% of cases) with lymphoma limited to the bone marrow or
constitutional symptoms and in 50% of cases with enlargement of lymph nodes, spleen, and/or liver; b) localized lymphoma (~25% of cases) with lymphoma limited to the bone marrow or an extra-nodal site, usually the skin but sometimes the thyroid gland, parotid
thyroid gland, parotid gland, oropharyngeal cavity, conjunctiva, or gastrointestinal tract; and c) no lymphoma (9% to 17% of cases) associated typically with a preexistent autoimmune disease but no evidence of lymphoma. Involved lymphoma-infiltrated tissues typically show a mixture of lymphoplamsmacytoid
tract; and c) no lymphoma (9% to 17% of cases) associated typically with a preexistent autoimmune disease but no evidence of lymphoma. Involved lymphoma-infiltrated tissues typically show a mixture of lymphoplamsmacytoid cells, plasma cells, lymphocytes, and sometimes variable numbers of eosinophils
evidence of lymphoma. Involved lymphoma-infiltrated tissues typically show a mixture of lymphoplamsmacytoid cells, plasma cells, lymphocytes, and sometimes variable numbers of eosinophils and hystiocytes. Treatment of the disease varies with its clinical severity. Patients with aggressive lymphoma have been treated with multiple drug chemotherapy,
a lymphoid neoplasm resembling either chronic lymphocytic leukemia or small lymphocytic lymphoma. This picture includes splenomegaly in virtually all cases, hepatomegaly in ~75% of cases, lymphadenopathy in ~40% of cases, and lytic bone lesions in ~20% of cases. Patients often have hypogammaglobulinemia, increases in
leukemia or small lymphocytic lymphoma. This picture includes splenomegaly in virtually all cases, hepatomegaly in ~75% of cases, lymphadenopathy in ~40% of cases, and lytic bone lesions in ~20% of cases. Patients often have hypogammaglobulinemia, increases in urinary free light chains, and a
in virtually all cases, hepatomegaly in ~75% of cases, lymphadenopathy in ~40% of cases, and lytic bone lesions in ~20% of cases. Patients often have hypogammaglobulinemia, increases in urinary free light chains, and a bone marrow containing vacuolated plasma cells or lymphoid cells.

not fully developed and are called blasts or leukemia cells. Symptoms may include bleeding and bruising, fatigue, fever, and an increased risk of infections. These symptoms occur due to a lack of normal blood cells. Diagnosis is typically made by blood tests or bone marrow biopsy.
symptoms occur due to a lack of normal blood cells. Diagnosis is typically made by blood tests or bone marrow biopsy.The exact cause of leukemia is unknown. A combination of genetic factors and environmental (non-inherited) factors are believed to play a role. Risk factors
include smoking, ionizing radiation, some chemicals (such as benzene), prior chemotherapy, and Down syndrome. People with a family history of leukemia are also at higher risk. There are four main types of leukemia—acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), acute myeloid leukemia (
, prior chemotherapy, and Down syndrome. People with a family history of leukemia are also at higher risk. There are four main types of leukemia—acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), acute myeloid leukemia (AML), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and chronic myeloid leukemia
CLL) and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)—as well as a number of less common types. Leukemias and lymphomas both belong to a broader group of tumors that affect the blood, bone marrow, and lymphoid system, known as tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues.Treatment may involve
affect the blood, bone marrow, and lymphoid system, known as tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues.Treatment may involve some combination of chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, and bone marrow transplant, in addition to supportive care and palliative care as needed. Certain types
chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, and bone marrow transplant, in addition to supportive care and palliative care as needed. Certain types of leukemia may be managed with watchful waiting. The success of treatment depends on the type of leukemia and the age of the person. Outcomes
transplant, in addition to supportive care and palliative care as needed. Certain types of leukemia may be managed with watchful waiting. The success of treatment depends on the type of leukemia and the age of the person. Outcomes have improved in the developed world. Five-year survival
care and palliative care as needed. Certain types of leukemia may be managed with watchful waiting. The success of treatment depends on the type of leukemia and the age of the person. Outcomes have improved in the developed world. Five-year survival rate is 57% in the
. In children under 15, the five-year survival rate is greater than 60% or even 90%, depending on the type of leukemia.   In children with acute leukemia who are cancer-free after five years, the cancer is unlikely to return.In 2015
present in 2.3 million people worldwide and caused 353,500 deaths. In 2012 it newly developed in 352,000 people. It is the most common type of cancer in children, with three-quarters of leukemia cases in children being the acute lymphoblastic type. However, over 90% of all
deaths. In 2012 it newly developed in 352,000 people. It is the most common type of cancer in children, with three-quarters of leukemia cases in children being the acute lymphoblastic type. However, over 90% of all leukemias are diagnosed in adults, with CLL and
progression and accumulation of the malignant cells, which then spill over into the bloodstream and spread to other organs of the body. Acute forms of leukemia are the most common forms of leukemia in children.Chronic leukemia is characterized by the excessive buildup of relatively mature, but still abnormal
, which then spill over into the bloodstream and spread to other organs of the body. Acute forms of leukemia are the most common forms of leukemia in children.Chronic leukemia is characterized by the excessive buildup of relatively mature, but still abnormal, white blood cells. Typically taking
white blood cells. Whereas acute leukemia must be treated immediately, chronic forms are sometimes monitored for some time before treatment to ensure maximum effectiveness of therapy. Chronic leukemia mostly occurs in older people, but can occur in any age group.Additionally, the diseases are subdivided according to
Chronic leukemia mostly occurs in older people, but can occur in any age group.Additionally, the diseases are subdivided according to which kind of blood cell is affected. This divides leukemias into lymphoblastic or lymphocytic leukemias and myeloid or myelogenous leukemias:In lymphoblastic or lymphocytic leukemias, the
leukemias into lymphoblastic or lymphocytic leukemias and myeloid or myelogenous leukemias:In lymphoblastic or lymphocytic leukemias, the cancerous change takes place in a type of marrow cell that normally goes on to form lymphocytes, which are infection-fighting immune system cells. Most lymphocytic leukemias involve a specific subtype
marrow cell that normally goes on to form lymphocytes, which are infection-fighting immune system cells. Most lymphocytic leukemias involve a specific subtype of lymphocyte, the B cell.In myeloid or myelogenous leukemias, the cancerous change takes place in a type of marrow cell that normally goes
leukemias involve a specific subtype of lymphocyte, the B cell.In myeloid or myelogenous leukemias, the cancerous change takes place in a type of marrow cell that normally goes on to form red blood cells, some other types of white cells, and platelets.Combining these two classifications
, some rarer types are usually considered to be outside of this classification scheme.Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common type of leukemia in young children. It also affects adults, especially those 65 and older. Standard treatments involve chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Subtypes include precursor
precursor T acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Burkitt's leukemia, and acute biphenotypic leukemia. While most cases of ALL occur in children, 80% of deaths from ALL occur in adults.Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) most often affects adults over the age of 55. It sometimes occurs
leukemia, acute myeloblastic leukemia, and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) occurs mainly in adults; a very small number of children also develop this disease. It is treated with imatinib (Gleevec in United States, Glivec in Europe) or other drugs. The
HTLV-I/II) are endemic in certain areas of the world.Clonal eosinophilias (also called clonal hypereosinophilias) are a group of blood disorders characterized by the growth of eosinophils in the bone marrow, blood, and/or other tissues.   They may be pre-cancerous
endemic in certain areas of the world.Clonal eosinophilias (also called clonal hypereosinophilias) are a group of blood disorders characterized by the growth of eosinophils in the bone marrow, blood, and/or other tissues.   They may be pre-cancerous or cancerous. Clonal eosinophilias involve a
those in Down syndrome, develops in a baby during pregnancy or shortly after birth, and resolves within 3 months or, in ~10% of cases, progresses to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. Transient myeloid leukemia is a pre-leukemic condition.The most common symptoms in children are easy
the bone marrow, by way of displacing the normal bone marrow cells with higher numbers of immature white blood cells, results in a lack of blood platelets, which are important in the blood clotting process. This means people with leukemia may easily become bruised, bleed excessively, or
sick, having fevers, chills, night sweats, feeling fatigued and other flu-like symptoms. Some people experience nausea or a feeling of fullness due to an enlarged liver and spleen; this can result in unintentional weight loss. Blasts affected by the disease may come together and
, then neurological symptoms (notably headaches) can occur. Uncommon neurological symptoms like migraines, seizures, or coma can occur as a result of brain stem pressure. All symptoms associated with leukemia can be attributed to other diseases. Consequently, leukemia is always diagnosed through medical tests.
apparent when a blood sample is viewed under a microscope, with the extra white blood cells frequently being immature or dysfunctional. The excessive number of cells can also interfere with the level of other cells, causing further harmful imbalance in the blood count.Some people diagnosed with leukemia do
blood count. This less-common condition is called aleukemia. The bone marrow still contains cancerous white blood cells that disrupt the normal production of blood cells, but they remain in the marrow instead of entering the bloodstream, where they would be visible in a blood test. For
aleukemia, the white blood cell counts in the bloodstream can be normal or low. Aleukemia can occur in any of the four major types of leukemia, and is particularly common in hairy cell leukemia.There is no single known cause for any of the different types of leukemias.
major types of leukemia, and is particularly common in hairy cell leukemia.There is no single known cause for any of the different types of leukemias. The few known causes, which are not generally factors within the control of the average person, account for relatively few cases.
causes, which are not generally factors within the control of the average person, account for relatively few cases. The cause for most cases of leukemia is unknown. The different leukemias likely have different causes.Leukemia, like other cancers, results from mutations in the DNA. Certain
results from mutations in the DNA. Certain mutations can trigger leukemia by activating oncogenes or deactivating tumor suppressor genes, and thereby disrupting the regulation of cell death, differentiation or division. These mutations may occur spontaneously or as a result of exposure to radiation or carcinogenic substances.Among adults
tumor suppressor genes, and thereby disrupting the regulation of cell death, differentiation or division. These mutations may occur spontaneously or as a result of exposure to radiation or carcinogenic substances.Among adults, the known causes are natural and artificial ionizing radiation, a few viruses such as human
a few viruses such as human T-lymphotropic virus, and some chemicals, notably benzene and alkylating chemotherapy agents for previous malignancies. Use of tobacco is associated with a small increase in the risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia in adults. Cohort and case-control studies have linked
myeloid leukemia in adults. Cohort and case-control studies have linked exposure to some petrochemicals and hair dyes to the development of some forms of leukemia. Diet has very limited or no effect, although eating more vegetables may confer a small protective benefit.Viruses have also been linked
has very limited or no effect, although eating more vegetables may confer a small protective benefit.Viruses have also been linked to some forms of leukemia.  For example, human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV-1) causes adult T-cell leukemia.A few cases of maternal
to develop leukemia during their childhoods than other children.Large doses of Sr-90 emission from nuclear reactor accidents, nicknamed bone seeker increases the risk of bone cancer and leukemia in animals, and is presumed to do so in people.Some people have a genetic predisposition towards developing leukemia.
. The affected people may have a single gene or multiple genes in common. In some cases, families tend to develop the same kinds of leukemia as other members; in other families, affected people may develop different forms of leukemia or related blood cancers.In addition to these
some cases, families tend to develop the same kinds of leukemia as other members; in other families, affected people may develop different forms of leukemia or related blood cancers.In addition to these genetic issues, people with chromosomal abnormalities or certain other genetic conditions have a greater risk
leukemia or related blood cancers.In addition to these genetic issues, people with chromosomal abnormalities or certain other genetic conditions have a greater risk of leukemia. For example, people with Down syndrome have a significantly increased risk of developing forms of acute leukemia (especially acute myeloid leukemia)
has been associated with a predisposition to childhood leukemia.Chronic myelogenous leukemia is associated with a genetic abnormality called the Philadelphia translocation; 95% of people with CML carry the Philadelphia mutation, although this is not exclusive to CML and can be observed in people with other types of leukemia
% of people with CML carry the Philadelphia mutation, although this is not exclusive to CML and can be observed in people with other types of leukemia.Whether or not non-ionizing radiation causes leukemia has been studied for several decades. The International Agency for Research on Cancer expert
electrical power. They concluded that there is limited evidence that high levels of ELF magnetic (but not electric) fields might cause some cases of childhood leukemia. No evidence for a relationship to leukemia or another form of malignancy in adults has been demonstrated. Since exposure to such levels
ELF magnetic (but not electric) fields might cause some cases of childhood leukemia. No evidence for a relationship to leukemia or another form of malignancy in adults has been demonstrated. Since exposure to such levels of ELFs is relatively uncommon, the World Health Organization concludes that ELF exposure
proven to be causative, would account for just 100 to 2400 cases worldwide each year, representing 0.2 to 4.9% of the total incidence of childhood leukemia for that year (about 0.03 to 0.9% of all leukemias).Diagnosis is usually based on repeated complete blood counts and a bone marrow
leukemia, especially in the early stages of the disease or during remission.  A lymph node biopsy can be performed to diagnose certain types of leukemia in certain situations.Following diagnosis, blood chemistry tests can be used to determine the degree of liver and kidney damage or the effects
can be performed to diagnose certain types of leukemia in certain situations.Following diagnosis, blood chemistry tests can be used to determine the degree of liver and kidney damage or the effects of chemotherapy on the person. When concerns arise about other damages due to leukemia, doctors may use
leukemia in certain situations.Following diagnosis, blood chemistry tests can be used to determine the degree of liver and kidney damage or the effects of chemotherapy on the person. When concerns arise about other damages due to leukemia, doctors may use an X-ray, MRI, or
about other damages due to leukemia, doctors may use an X-ray, MRI, or ultrasound.  These can potentially show leukemia's effects on such body parts as bones (X-ray), the brain (MRI), or the kidneys, spleen, and
reason, the American Cancer Society estimates that at least one-fifth of the people with leukemia have not yet been diagnosed.Most forms of leukemia are treated with pharmaceutical medication, typically combined into a multi-drug chemotherapy regimen. Some are also treated with radiation therapy. In
Some are also treated with radiation therapy. In some cases, a bone marrow transplant is effective.Management of ALL is directed towards control of bone marrow and systemic (whole-body) disease. Additionally, treatment must prevent leukemic cells from spreading to other sites, particularly the
low-risk ALL, standard therapy usually consists of three drugs (prednisone, L-asparaginase, and vincristine) for the first month of treatment.Consolidation therapy or intensification therapy to eliminate any remaining leukemia cells. There are many different approaches to consolidation, but it is typically
risk or relapsed people. Decision to treat Hematologists base CLL treatment on both the stage and symptoms of the individual person. A large group of people with CLL have low-grade disease, which does not benefit from treatment. Individuals with CLL-related complications or more advanced disease
. In general, the indications for treatment are:Falling hemoglobin or platelet countProgression to a later stage of diseasePainful, disease-related overgrowth of lymph nodes or spleenAn increase in the rate of lymphocyte production Treatment approach Most CLL cases are incurable by present treatments, so treatment is directed
:Falling hemoglobin or platelet countProgression to a later stage of diseasePainful, disease-related overgrowth of lymph nodes or spleenAn increase in the rate of lymphocyte production Treatment approach Most CLL cases are incurable by present treatments, so treatment is directed towards suppressing the disease for many years, rather
disease, while offering specific treatment for the central nervous system (CNS), if involved.In general, most oncologists rely on combinations of drugs for the initial, induction phase of chemotherapy. Such combination chemotherapy usually offers the benefits of early remission and a lower risk of disease
central nervous system (CNS), if involved.In general, most oncologists rely on combinations of drugs for the initial, induction phase of chemotherapy. Such combination chemotherapy usually offers the benefits of early remission and a lower risk of disease resistance. Consolidation and maintenance treatments are intended
combinations of drugs for the initial, induction phase of chemotherapy. Such combination chemotherapy usually offers the benefits of early remission and a lower risk of disease resistance. Consolidation and maintenance treatments are intended to prevent disease recurrence. Consolidation treatment often entails a repetition of induction chemotherapy or the intensification
remission and a lower risk of disease resistance. Consolidation and maintenance treatments are intended to prevent disease recurrence. Consolidation treatment often entails a repetition of induction chemotherapy or the intensification chemotherapy with additional drugs. By contrast, maintenance treatment involves drug doses that are lower than those administered during the
treatment involves drug doses that are lower than those administered during the induction phase.There are many possible treatments for CML, but the standard of care for newly diagnosed people is imatinib (Gleevec) therapy. Compared to most anti-cancer drugs, it has relatively few side effects
-cancer drugs, it has relatively few side effects and can be taken orally at home. With this drug, more than 90% of people will be able to keep the disease in check for at least five years, so that CML becomes a chronic, manageable condition.
a permanent cure, then an allogeneic bone marrow transplantation may be performed. This procedure involves high-dose chemotherapy and radiation followed by infusion of bone marrow from a compatible donor. Approximately 30% of people die from this procedure.Decision to treatPeople with hairy cell leukemia who are
be performed. This procedure involves high-dose chemotherapy and radiation followed by infusion of bone marrow from a compatible donor. Approximately 30% of people die from this procedure.Decision to treatPeople with hairy cell leukemia who are symptom-free typically do not receive immediate treatment. Treatment
, or fatigue that is significant enough to disrupt the person's everyday life.Typical treatment approachPeople who need treatment usually receive either one week of cladribine, given daily by intravenous infusion or a simple injection under the skin, or six months of pentostatin, given every four weeks by
need treatment usually receive either one week of cladribine, given daily by intravenous infusion or a simple injection under the skin, or six months of pentostatin, given every four weeks by intravenous infusion. In most cases, one round of treatment will produce a prolonged remission.Other treatments
simple injection under the skin, or six months of pentostatin, given every four weeks by intravenous infusion. In most cases, one round of treatment will produce a prolonged remission.Other treatments include rituximab infusion or self-injection with Interferon-alpha. In limited cases, the
have been attempted, with limited success in certain people: purine analogues (pentostatin, fludarabine, cladribine), chlorambucil, and various forms of combination chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone CHOP, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone [COP], vincristine, doxorubicin, prednisone
response.Treatment for juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia can include splenectomy, chemotherapy, and bone marrow transplantation.Before dental work it is recommended that the person's physician be consulted. Dental work is recommended before chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Those in remission can be treated per normal.The success of
.Treatment for juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia can include splenectomy, chemotherapy, and bone marrow transplantation.Before dental work it is recommended that the person's physician be consulted. Dental work is recommended before chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Those in remission can be treated per normal.The success of
's physician be consulted. Dental work is recommended before chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Those in remission can be treated per normal.The success of treatment depends on the type of leukemia and the age of the person. Outcomes have improved in the developed world. The average five-
work is recommended before chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Those in remission can be treated per normal.The success of treatment depends on the type of leukemia and the age of the person. Outcomes have improved in the developed world. The average five-year survival rate is 61%
States. In children under 15, the five-year survival rate is greater (60 to 85%), depending on the type of leukemia. In children with acute leukemia who are cancer-free after five years, the cancer is unlikely to return.Outcomes depend on
unlikely to return.Outcomes depend on whether it is acute or chronic, the specific abnormal white blood cell type, the presence and severity of anemia or thrombocytopenia, the degree of tissue abnormality, the presence of metastasis and lymph node and bone marrow infiltration, the availability of therapies
whether it is acute or chronic, the specific abnormal white blood cell type, the presence and severity of anemia or thrombocytopenia, the degree of tissue abnormality, the presence of metastasis and lymph node and bone marrow infiltration, the availability of therapies and the skills of the health care
, the specific abnormal white blood cell type, the presence and severity of anemia or thrombocytopenia, the degree of tissue abnormality, the presence of metastasis and lymph node and bone marrow infiltration, the availability of therapies and the skills of the health care team. Treatment outcomes may be
severity of anemia or thrombocytopenia, the degree of tissue abnormality, the presence of metastasis and lymph node and bone marrow infiltration, the availability of therapies and the skills of the health care team. Treatment outcomes may be better when people are treated at larger centers with greater experience.
In 2010, globally, approximately 281,500 people died of leukemia. In 2000, approximately 256,000 children and adults around the world developed a form of leukemia, and 209,000 died from it. This represents about 3% of the almost seven million deaths due to cancer that year, and
Of the sixteen separate sites the body compared, leukemia was the 12th most common class of neoplastic disease, and the 11th most common cause of cancer-related death. Leukemia occurs more commonly in the developed world.About 245,000 people in the United States are affected with some form
cancer-related death. Leukemia occurs more commonly in the developed world.About 245,000 people in the United States are affected with some form of leukemia, including those that have achieved remission or cure. Rates from 1975 to 2011 have increased by 0.7% per year among children.
that have achieved remission or cure. Rates from 1975 to 2011 have increased by 0.7% per year among children. Approximately 44,270 new cases of leukemia were diagnosed in the year 2008 in the US. This represents 2.9% of all cancers (excluding simple basal cell and squamous cell
basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers) in the United States, and 30.4% of all blood cancers.Among children with some form of cancer, about a third have a type of leukemia, most commonly acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A type of leukemia is the second most common
the United States, and 30.4% of all blood cancers.Among children with some form of cancer, about a third have a type of leukemia, most commonly acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A type of leukemia is the second most common form of cancer in infants (under the age
.Among children with some form of cancer, about a third have a type of leukemia, most commonly acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A type of leukemia is the second most common form of cancer in infants (under the age of 12 months) and the most common form of cancer
, about a third have a type of leukemia, most commonly acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A type of leukemia is the second most common form of cancer in infants (under the age of 12 months) and the most common form of cancer in older children. Boys are somewhat more
type of leukemia is the second most common form of cancer in infants (under the age of 12 months) and the most common form of cancer in older children. Boys are somewhat more likely to develop leukemia than girls, and white American children are almost twice as likely to
common cancer in the UK (around 8,600 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and it is the ninth most common cause of cancer death (around 4,800 people died in 2012).Leukemia was first described by anatomist and surgeon Alfred-Armand-Louis-Marie Velpeau in 1827
yellow" as opposed to the normal red. This finding allowed Neumann to conclude that a bone marrow problem was responsible for the abnormal blood of people with leukemia.By 1900 leukemia was viewed as a family of diseases as opposed to a single disease. By 1947 Boston pathologist Sidney
to conclude that a bone marrow problem was responsible for the abnormal blood of people with leukemia.By 1900 leukemia was viewed as a family of diseases as opposed to a single disease. By 1947 Boston pathologist Sidney Farber believed from past experiments that aminopterin, a folic acid mimic,
aminopterin, a folic acid mimic, could potentially cure leukemia in children. The majority of the children with ALL who were tested showed signs of improvement in their bone marrow, but none of them were actually cured. This, however, led to further experiments.In 1962,
held this cultural position until it was discovered to be an infectious disease. The 1970 romance novel Love Story is an example of this romanticization of leukemia.In the United States, around $5.4 billion is spent on treatment a year.Significant research into the causes, prevalence,
, around $5.4 billion is spent on treatment a year.Significant research into the causes, prevalence, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of leukemia is being performed. Hundreds of clinical trials are being planned or conducted at any given time. Studies may focus on effective means of
of leukemia is being performed. Hundreds of clinical trials are being planned or conducted at any given time. Studies may focus on effective means of treatment, better ways of treating the disease, improving the quality of life for people, or appropriate care in remission or after cures.
or conducted at any given time. Studies may focus on effective means of treatment, better ways of treating the disease, improving the quality of life for people, or appropriate care in remission or after cures.In general, there are two types of leukemia research: clinical or
disease, improving the quality of life for people, or appropriate care in remission or after cures.In general, there are two types of leukemia research: clinical or translational research and basic research. Clinical/translational research focuses on studying the disease in a defined and generally immediately
and loss of the antigen targeted by the CAR-T cells is a common mechanism for relapse. The stem cells that cause different types of leukaemia are also being researched.Leukemia is rarely associated with pregnancy, affecting only about 1 in 10,000 pregnant women. How it is handled
.Leukemia is rarely associated with pregnancy, affecting only about 1 in 10,000 pregnant women. How it is handled depends primarily on the type of leukemia. Nearly all leukemias appearing in pregnant women are acute leukemias. Acute leukemias normally require prompt, aggressive treatment, despite significant risks of
of leukemia. Nearly all leukemias appearing in pregnant women are acute leukemias. Acute leukemias normally require prompt, aggressive treatment, despite significant risks of pregnancy loss and birth defects, especially if chemotherapy is given during the developmentally sensitive first trimester. Chronic myelogenous leukemia can be treated with relative
after the end of the pregnancy.Acute erythroid leukemiaAntileukemic drugs, medications used to kill leukemia cellsCancer-related fatigueHematologic diseases, the large class of blood-related disorders, including leukemiaMultiple myelomaLeukemia at CurlieLeukaemia information from Cancer Research UK
; diminished urine stream and straining to void (caused by urethral stricture); frequent urination and increased nighttime urination (nocturia); hardening of tissue in the perineum, labia, or penis; itching; incontinence; pain during or after sexual intercourse (dyspareunia); painful urination
.  "Five-year relative survival rates from cancers of the ureter were similar among males vs. females..."Ureteral neoplasm, a type of tumor that can be primary, or associated with a metastasis from another siteUrethral cancer, cancer of the urethraUrothelium, the tissue layer that lines
side of the chest and lasts for more than a few minutes. The discomfort may occasionally feel like heartburn. Other symptoms may include shortness of breath, nausea, feeling faint, a cold sweat or feeling tired. About 30% of people have atypical symptoms. Women more often
like heartburn. Other symptoms may include shortness of breath, nausea, feeling faint, a cold sweat or feeling tired. About 30% of people have atypical symptoms. Women more often present without chest pain and instead have neck pain, arm pain or feel tired. Among those
, arm pain or feel tired. Among those over 75 years old, about 5% have had an MI with little or no history of symptoms. An MI may cause heart failure, an irregular heartbeat, cardiogenic shock or cardiac arrest.Most MIs occur due to coronary artery
shock or cardiac arrest.Most MIs occur due to coronary artery disease. Risk factors include high blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, lack of exercise, obesity, high blood cholesterol, poor diet and excessive alcohol intake. The complete blockage of a coronary artery caused by a rupture
to cocaine, significant emotional stress (commonly known as Takotsubo syndrome or broken heart syndrome) and extreme cold, among others. A number of tests are useful to help with diagnosis, including electrocardiograms (ECGs), blood tests and coronary angiography. An ECG, which is a
help with chest pain; however, they do not improve overall outcomes. Supplemental oxygen is recommended in those with low oxygen levels or shortness of breath. In a STEMI, treatments attempt to restore blood flow to the heart and include percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), where the
in men as women. About one million people have an MI each year in the United States. In the developed world, the risk of death in those who have had an STEMI is about 10%. Rates of MI for a given age have decreased globally between 1990 and
Myocardial infarction (MI) refers to tissue death (infarction) of the heart muscle (myocardium) caused by ischaemia, that is lack of oxygen delivery to myocardial tissue. It is a type of acute coronary syndrome, which describes a sudden or short-term change in symptoms
accompanied by other symptoms such as sweating.Chest pain is the most common symptom of acute myocardial infarction and is often described as a sensation of tightness, pressure, or squeezing. Pain radiates most often to the left arm, but may also radiate to the lower jaw, neck
a poor positive predictive value.Typically, chest pain because of ischemia, be it unstable angina or myocardial infarction, lessens with the use of nitroglycerin, but nitroglycerin may also relieve chest pain arising from non-cardiac causes.Chest pain may be accompanied by sweating, nausea or
fainting, and these symptoms may also occur without any pain at all. In women, the most common symptoms of myocardial infarction include shortness of breath, weakness, and fatigue. Shortness of breath is a common, and sometimes the only symptom, occurring when damage to the heart
any pain at all. In women, the most common symptoms of myocardial infarction include shortness of breath, weakness, and fatigue. Shortness of breath is a common, and sometimes the only symptom, occurring when damage to the heart limits the output of the left ventricle, with
weakness, light-headedness, palpitations, and abnormalities in heart rate or blood pressure. These symptoms are likely induced by a massive surge of catecholamines from the sympathetic nervous system, which occurs in response to pain and, where present, low blood pressure. Loss of consciousness due
massive surge of catecholamines from the sympathetic nervous system, which occurs in response to pain and, where present, low blood pressure. Loss of consciousness due to inadequate blood flow to the brain and cardiogenic shock, and sudden death, frequently due to the development of ventricular fibrillation,
. In people with diabetes, differences in pain threshold, autonomic neuropathy, and psychological factors have been cited as possible explanations for the lack of symptoms. In heart transplantation, the donor heart is not fully innervated by the nervous system of the recipient.The most prominent risk factors
the Framingham Risk Score. At any given age, men are more at risk than women for the development of cardiovascular disease. High levels of blood cholesterol is a known risk factor, particularly high low-density lipoprotein, low high-density lipoprotein, and high triglycerides.Many
of about 36% and obesity the cause of 20% of coronary artery disease. Lack of physical activity has been linked to 7–12% of cases. Less common causes include stress-related causes such as job stress, which accounts for about 3% of cases, and chronic
linked to 7–12% of cases. Less common causes include stress-related causes such as job stress, which accounts for about 3% of cases, and chronic high stress levels.There is varying evidence about the importance of saturated fat in the development of myocardial infarctions. Eating
myocardial infarction before age 55 years, or a female first-degree relative (mother, sister) less than age 65 increases a person's risk of MI.Genome-wide association studies have found 27 genetic variants that are associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction. The strongest association
before age 55 years, or a female first-degree relative (mother, sister) less than age 65 increases a person's risk of MI.Genome-wide association studies have found 27 genetic variants that are associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction. The strongest association of MI
Shift work is also associated with a higher risk of MI. And one analysis has found an increase in heart attacks immediately following the start of daylight saving time.Women who use combined oral contraceptive pills have a modestly increased risk of myocardial infarction, especially in the presence of other
increment of 30 units in Pollutant Standards Index correlated with an 8% increased risk of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest on the day of exposure. Extremes of temperature are also associated.A number of acute and chronic infections including Chlamydophila pneumoniae, influenza, Helicobacter pylori, and
in Pollutant Standards Index correlated with an 8% increased risk of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest on the day of exposure. Extremes of temperature are also associated.A number of acute and chronic infections including Chlamydophila pneumoniae, influenza, Helicobacter pylori, and Porphyromonas gingivalis among others
, Helicobacter pylori, and Porphyromonas gingivalis among others have been linked to atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction. As of 2013, there is no evidence of benefit from antibiotics or vaccination, however, calling the association into question. Myocardial infarction can also occur as a late consequence of Kawasaki disease
tissue death in tissue being supplied by that artery. Atherosclerotic plaques are often present for decades before they result in symptoms.The gradual buildup of cholesterol and fibrous tissue in plaques in the wall of the coronary arteries or other arteries, typically over decades, is termed atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis
fever, a fast heart rate, hyperthyroidism, too few red blood cells in the bloodstream, or low blood pressure. Damage or failure of procedures such as percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass grafts may cause a myocardial infarction. Spasm of coronary arteries, such as Prinzmetal's
their place. When an artery is blocked, cells lack oxygen, needed to produce ATP in mitochondria. ATP is required for the maintenance of electrolyte balance, particularly through the Na/K ATPase. This leads to an ischemic cascade of intracellular changes, necrosis and apoptosis of affected
), are most susceptible to damage. Ischemia first affects this region, the subendocardial region, and tissue begins to die within 15–30 minutes of loss of blood supply. The dead tissue is surrounded by a zone of potentially reversible ischemia that progresses to become a full-thickness transmural
are most susceptible to damage. Ischemia first affects this region, the subendocardial region, and tissue begins to die within 15–30 minutes of loss of blood supply. The dead tissue is surrounded by a zone of potentially reversible ischemia that progresses to become a full-thickness transmural infarct.
of infarction can take place over 3–4 hours. These changes are seen on gross pathology and cannot be predicted by the presence or absence of Q waves on an ECG. The position, size and extent of an infarct depends on the affected artery, totality of the blockage,
manifest as ventricular arrhythmia. The re-perfusion injury is a consequence of the calcium and sodium uptake from the cardiac cells and the release of oxygen radicals during re-perfusion. No-reflow phenomenon–when blood is still unable to be distributed to the affected myocardium in spite
because they have greater sensitivity and specificity for measuring injury to the heart muscle than other tests. A rise in troponin occurs within 2–3 hours of injury to the heart muscle, and peaks within 1–2 days. The level of the troponin, as well as a change over time,
the troponin, as well as a change over time, are useful in measuring and diagnosing or excluding myocardial infarctions, and the diagnostic accuracy of troponin testing is improving over time. One high-sensitivity cardiac troponin is able to rule out a heart attack as long as the ECG
within 2–3 days. Copeptin may be useful to rule out MI rapidly when used along with troponin.Electrocardiograms (ECGs) are a series of leads placed on a person's chest that measure electrical activity associated with contraction of the heart muscle. The taking of an ECG is an
be useful to rule out MI rapidly when used along with troponin.Electrocardiograms (ECGs) are a series of leads placed on a person's chest that measure electrical activity associated with contraction of the heart muscle. The taking of an ECG is an important part in the workup of
with different labelled features. In addition to a rise in biomarkers, a rise in the ST segment, changes in the shape or flipping of T waves, new Q waves, or a new left bundle branch block can be used to diagnose an AMI. In addition, ST
diagnosis and characterisation of myocardial infarction. Tests such as chest X-rays can be used to explore and exclude alternate causes of a person's symptoms. Tests such as stress echocardiography and myocardial perfusion imaging can confirm a diagnosis when a person's history, physical examination (including cardiac
and exclude alternate causes of a person's symptoms. Tests such as stress echocardiography and myocardial perfusion imaging can confirm a diagnosis when a person's history, physical examination (including cardiac examination) ECG, and cardiac biomarkers suggest the likelihood of a problem.Echocardiography, an ultrasound scan
, its size, shape, and any abnormal motion of the heart walls as they beat that may indicate a myocardial infarction. The flow of blood can be imaged, and contrast dyes may be given to improve image. Other scans using radioactive contrast include SPECT CT-scans using
, sestamibi (MIBI scans) or tetrofosmin; or a PET scan using Fludeoxyglucose or rubidium-82. These nuclear medicine scans can visualize the perfusion of heart muscle. SPECT may also be used to determine viability of tissue, and whether areas of ischemia are inducible.Medical societies and professional
scan using Fludeoxyglucose or rubidium-82. These nuclear medicine scans can visualize the perfusion of heart muscle. SPECT may also be used to determine viability of tissue, and whether areas of ischemia are inducible.Medical societies and professional guidelines recommend that the physician confirm a person is at high risk
These nuclear medicine scans can visualize the perfusion of heart muscle. SPECT may also be used to determine viability of tissue, and whether areas of ischemia are inducible.Medical societies and professional guidelines recommend that the physician confirm a person is at high risk for myocardial infarction before conducting imaging
who have a normal ECG and who are able to exercise, for example, do not merit routine imaging.		There are many causes of chest pain, which can originate from the heart, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, aorta, and other muscles, bones and nerves surrounding the
the chest. In addition to myocardial infarction, other causes include angina, insufficient blood supply (ischemia) to the heart muscles without evidence of cell death, gastroesophageal reflux disease; pulmonary embolism, tumors of the lungs, pneumonia, rib fracture, costochondritis, heart failure and other
edema, pneumonia, allergic reactions and asthma, and pulmonary embolus, acute respiratory distress syndrome and metabolic acidosis. There are many different causes of fatigue, and myocardial infarction is not a common cause.There is a large crossover between the lifestyle and activity recommendations to prevent a myocardial
national authorities, with recommendations including increasing the intake of wholegrain starch, reducing sugar intake (particularly of refined sugar), consuming five portions of fruit and vegetables daily, consuming two or more portions of fish per week, and consuming 4–5 portions of unsalted nuts, seeds, or
starch, reducing sugar intake (particularly of refined sugar), consuming five portions of fruit and vegetables daily, consuming two or more portions of fish per week, and consuming 4–5 portions of unsalted nuts, seeds, or legumes per week. The dietary pattern with the greatest support
many clinical practice guidelines continue to recommend aspirin for primary prevention, and some researchers feel that those with very high cardiovascular risk but low risk of bleeding should continue to receive aspirin.There is a large crossover between the lifestyle and activity recommendations to prevent a myocardial infarction, and those
heart failure, and is recommended to start gradually after 1–2 weeks. Counselling should be provided relating to medications used, and for warning signs of depression. Previous studies suggested a benefit from omega-3 fatty acid supplementation but this has not been confirmed. Medications Following a heart attack, nitrates
has not been confirmed. Medications Following a heart attack, nitrates, when taken for two days, and ACE-inhibitors decrease the risk of death. Other medications include:Aspirin is continued indefinitely, as well as another antiplatelet agent such as clopidogrel or ticagrelor ("dual antiplatelet
adjusted based on risk of further cardiac events as well as bleeding risk. In those who have had a stent, more than 12 months of clopidogrel plus aspirin does not affect the risk of death.Beta blocker therapy such as metoprolol or carvedilol is recommended to be started within 24
well as bleeding risk. In those who have had a stent, more than 12 months of clopidogrel plus aspirin does not affect the risk of death.Beta blocker therapy such as metoprolol or carvedilol is recommended to be started within 24 hours, provided there is no acute heart failure
acute heart failure or heart block. The dose should be increased to the highest tolerated. Contrary to what was long believed, the use of beta blockers does not appear to affect the risk of death, possibly because other treatments for MI have improved. When beta blocker medication is
be increased to the highest tolerated. Contrary to what was long believed, the use of beta blockers does not appear to affect the risk of death, possibly because other treatments for MI have improved. When beta blocker medication is given within the first 24–72 hours of a STEMI no
and another 1 in 200 from having an abnormal heart rhythm. Additionally, for 1 in 91 the medication causes a temporary decrease in the heart's ability to pump blood.ACE inhibitor therapy should be started within 24 hours, and continued indefinitely at the highest tolerated dose. This is
another 1 in 200 from having an abnormal heart rhythm. Additionally, for 1 in 91 the medication causes a temporary decrease in the heart's ability to pump blood.ACE inhibitor therapy should be started within 24 hours, and continued indefinitely at the highest tolerated dose. This is
electric device connected to the heart and surgically inserted under the skin, may be recommended. This is particularly if there are any ongoing signs of heart failure, with a low left ventricular ejection fraction and a New York Heart Association grade II or III after 40 days of the infarction
ischemia, and modify risk factors with the aim of preventing future MIs. In addition, the main treatment for myocardial infarctions with ECG evidence of ST elevation (STEMI) include thrombolysis or percutaneous coronary intervention, although PCI is also ideally conducted within 1–3 days for NSTEMI. In addition
or intravenously) may improve the blood supply to the heart, and decrease the work the heart must do. It is an important part of therapy for its pain relief, despite there being no benefit to overall mortality. Morphine may also be used, and is effective for the
glycoprotein αIIbβ3a receptor such as eptifibatide or tirofiban may be used.There is varying evidence on the mortality benefits in NSTEMI. A 2014 review of P2Y12 inhibitors such as clopidogrel found they do not change the risk of death when given to people with a suspected NSTEMI prior to PCI,
is varying evidence on the mortality benefits in NSTEMI. A 2014 review of P2Y12 inhibitors such as clopidogrel found they do not change the risk of death when given to people with a suspected NSTEMI prior to PCI, nor do heparins change the risk of death. They do decrease the
they do not change the risk of death when given to people with a suspected NSTEMI prior to PCI, nor do heparins change the risk of death. They do decrease the risk of having a further myocardial infarction.Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is the treatment of choice
risk of death. They do decrease the risk of having a further myocardial infarction.Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is the treatment of choice for STEMI if it can be performed in a timely manner, ideally within 90–120 minutes of contact with a medical provider. Some recommend
coronary intervention (PCI) is the treatment of choice for STEMI if it can be performed in a timely manner, ideally within 90–120 minutes of contact with a medical provider. Some recommend it is also done in NSTEMI within 1–3 days, particularly when considered high-risk. A
used to identify and clear blockages using small balloons, which are dragged through the blocked segment, dragging away the clot, or the insertion of stents. Coronary artery bypass grafting is only considered when the affected area of heart muscle is large, and PCI is unsuitable, for example
the blocked segment, dragging away the clot, or the insertion of stents. Coronary artery bypass grafting is only considered when the affected area of heart muscle is large, and PCI is unsuitable, for example with difficult cardiac anatomy. After PCI, people are generally placed on aspirin
for at least a year.If PCI cannot be performed within 90 to 120 minutes in STEMI then fibrinolysis, preferably within 30 minutes of arrival to hospital, is recommended. If a person has had symptoms for 12 to 24 hours evidence for effectiveness of thrombolysis is less and
preferably within 30 minutes of arrival to hospital, is recommended. If a person has had symptoms for 12 to 24 hours evidence for effectiveness of thrombolysis is less and if they have had symptoms for more than 24 hours it is not recommended. Thrombolysis involves the administration of medication that
for effectiveness of thrombolysis is less and if they have had symptoms for more than 24 hours it is not recommended. Thrombolysis involves the administration of medication that activates the enzymes that normally dissolve blood clots. These medications include tissue plasminogen activator, reteplase, streptokinase, and tenecteplase. Thrombolysis
normally dissolve blood clots. These medications include tissue plasminogen activator, reteplase, streptokinase, and tenecteplase. Thrombolysis is not recommended in a number of situations, particularly when associated with a high risk of bleeding or the potential for problematic bleeding, such as active bleeding, past strokes or
activator, reteplase, streptokinase, and tenecteplase. Thrombolysis is not recommended in a number of situations, particularly when associated with a high risk of bleeding or the potential for problematic bleeding, such as active bleeding, past strokes or bleeds into the brain, or severe hypertension. Situations
bleeds into the brain, or severe hypertension. Situations in which thrombolysis may be considered, but with caution, include recent surgery, use of anticoagulants, pregnancy, and proclivity to bleeding. Major risks of thrombolysis are major bleeding and intracranial bleeding. Pre-hospital thrombolysis reduces time
thrombolysis may be considered, but with caution, include recent surgery, use of anticoagulants, pregnancy, and proclivity to bleeding. Major risks of thrombolysis are major bleeding and intracranial bleeding. Pre-hospital thrombolysis reduces time to thrombolytic treatment, based on studies conducted in higher income countries
90 minutes, then rescue PCI is indicated emergently.Those who have had cardiac arrest may benefit from targeted temperature management with evaluation for implementation of hypothermia protocols. Furthermore, those with cardiac arrest, and ST elevation at any time, should usually have angiography. Aldosterone antagonists appear to
hospitalization.The prognosis after myocardial infarction varies greatly depending on the extent and location of the affected heart muscle, and the development and management of complications. Prognosis is worse with older age and social isolation. Anterior infarcts, persistent ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation, development of heart blocks,
development and management of complications. Prognosis is worse with older age and social isolation. Anterior infarcts, persistent ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation, development of heart blocks, and left ventricular impairment are all associated with poorer prognosis. Without treatment, about a quarter of those affected by MI die
myocardial infarction, but when they do, about half die. In the short-term, neonatal survivors seem to have a normal quality of life.Complications may occur immediately following the myocardial infarction or may take time to develop. Disturbances of heart rhythms, including atrial fibrillation,
survivors seem to have a normal quality of life.Complications may occur immediately following the myocardial infarction or may take time to develop. Disturbances of heart rhythms, including atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation and heart block can arise as a result of ischemia, cardiac scarring, and
take time to develop. Disturbances of heart rhythms, including atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation and heart block can arise as a result of ischemia, cardiac scarring, and infarct location. Stroke is also a risk, either as a result of clots transmitted from the heart during
block can arise as a result of ischemia, cardiac scarring, and infarct location. Stroke is also a risk, either as a result of clots transmitted from the heart during PCI, as a result of bleeding following anticoagulation or as a result of disturbances in the heart's ability
and infarct location. Stroke is also a risk, either as a result of clots transmitted from the heart during PCI, as a result of bleeding following anticoagulation or as a result of disturbances in the heart's ability to pump effectively as a result of the infarction. Regurgitation of
risk, either as a result of clots transmitted from the heart during PCI, as a result of bleeding following anticoagulation or as a result of disturbances in the heart's ability to pump effectively as a result of the infarction. Regurgitation of blood through the mitral valve is possible,
a result of clots transmitted from the heart during PCI, as a result of bleeding following anticoagulation or as a result of disturbances in the heart's ability to pump effectively as a result of the infarction. Regurgitation of blood through the mitral valve is possible, particularly if the infarction causes
result of clots transmitted from the heart during PCI, as a result of bleeding following anticoagulation or as a result of disturbances in the heart's ability to pump effectively as a result of the infarction. Regurgitation of blood through the mitral valve is possible, particularly if the infarction causes
of bleeding following anticoagulation or as a result of disturbances in the heart's ability to pump effectively as a result of the infarction. Regurgitation of blood through the mitral valve is possible, particularly if the infarction causes dysfunction of the papillary muscle. Cardiogenic shock as a result of the
ventricular dividing wall or left ventricular wall may occur within the initial weeks. Dressler's syndrome, a reaction following larger infarcts and a cause of pericarditis is also possible.Heart failure may develop as a long-term consequence, with an impaired ability of heart muscle to pump,
larger infarcts and a cause of pericarditis is also possible.Heart failure may develop as a long-term consequence, with an impaired ability of heart muscle to pump, scarring, and increase in the size of the existing muscle. Aneurysm of the left ventricle myocardium develops in about
to pump, scarring, and increase in the size of the existing muscle. Aneurysm of the left ventricle myocardium develops in about 10% of MI and is itself a risk factor for heart failure, ventricular arrhythmia and the development of clots.Risk factors for complications and death include
the left ventricle myocardium develops in about 10% of MI and is itself a risk factor for heart failure, ventricular arrhythmia and the development of clots.Risk factors for complications and death include age, hemodynamic parameters (such as heart failure, cardiac arrest on admission, systolic blood
The World Health Organization estimated in 2004, that 12.2% of worldwide deaths were from ischemic heart disease; with it being the leading cause of death in high- or middle-income countries and second only to lower respiratory infections in lower-income countries. Worldwide, more than 3
than 3 million people have STEMIs and 4 million have NSTEMIs a year. STEMIs occur about twice as often in men as women.Rates of death from ischemic heart disease (IHD) have slowed or declined in most high-income countries, although cardiovascular disease still accounted for one
-income countries, although cardiovascular disease still accounted for one in three of all deaths in the US in 2008. For example, rates of death from cardiovascular disease have decreased almost a third between 2001 and 2011 in the United States.In contrast, IHD is becoming a more
cardiovascular disease have decreased almost a third between 2001 and 2011 in the United States.In contrast, IHD is becoming a more common cause of death in the developing world. For example, in India, IHD had become the leading cause of death by 2004, accounting for 1.46
IHD is becoming a more common cause of death in the developing world. For example, in India, IHD had become the leading cause of death by 2004, accounting for 1.46 million deaths (14% of total deaths) and deaths due to IHD were expected to double during
to ischemic heart disease are predicted to account for 5.5% of total DALYs in 2030, making it the second-most-important cause of disability (after unipolar depressive disorder), as well as the leading cause of death by this date.Depictions of heart attacks in popular
2030, making it the second-most-important cause of disability (after unipolar depressive disorder), as well as the leading cause of death by this date.Depictions of heart attacks in popular media often include collapsing or loss of consciousness which are not common symptoms; these
most-important cause of disability (after unipolar depressive disorder), as well as the leading cause of death by this date.Depictions of heart attacks in popular media often include collapsing or loss of consciousness which are not common symptoms; these depictions contribute to widespread misunderstanding about the
), as well as the leading cause of death by this date.Depictions of heart attacks in popular media often include collapsing or loss of consciousness which are not common symptoms; these depictions contribute to widespread misunderstanding about the symptoms of myocardial infarctions, which in turn contributes to people
policy. In some countries or states, a person having suffered from an MI may be prevented from participating in activity that puts other people's lives at risk, for example driving a car or flying an airplane.Allison, Thomas G (6 December 2012). "Stress
) are transported in a protein capsule. The size of that capsule, or lipoprotein, determines its density. The lipoprotein density and type of apolipoproteins it contains determines the fate of the particle and its influence on metabolism.Hyperlipidemias are divided into primary and secondary subtypes. Primary hyperlipidemia
influence on atherosclerosis. In addition, some forms may predispose to acute pancreatitis.Hyperlipidemia predisposes a person to atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is the accumulation of lipids, cholesterol, calcium, fibrous plaques within the walls of arteries. This accumulation narrows the blood vessel and reduces blood flow and oxygen
acute pancreatitis.Hyperlipidemia predisposes a person to atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is the accumulation of lipids, cholesterol, calcium, fibrous plaques within the walls of arteries. This accumulation narrows the blood vessel and reduces blood flow and oxygen to muscles of the heart. Over time fatty deposits can build
lipoprotein metabolism. Also, hyperlipidemia may be idiopathic, that is, without a known cause.Hyperlipidemias are also classified according to which types of lipids are elevated, that is hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia or both in combined hyperlipidemia. Elevated levels of Lipoprotein(a) may also be classified as a
Hyperlipidemias are also classified according to which types of lipids are elevated, that is hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia or both in combined hyperlipidemia. Elevated levels of Lipoprotein(a) may also be classified as a form of hyperlipidemia.Familial hyperlipidemias are classified according to the Fredrickson classification, which is based on
are elevated, that is hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia or both in combined hyperlipidemia. Elevated levels of Lipoprotein(a) may also be classified as a form of hyperlipidemia.Familial hyperlipidemias are classified according to the Fredrickson classification, which is based on the pattern of lipoproteins on electrophoresis or ultracentrifugation. It
may also be classified as a form of hyperlipidemia.Familial hyperlipidemias are classified according to the Fredrickson classification, which is based on the pattern of lipoproteins on electrophoresis or ultracentrifugation. It was later adopted by the World Health Organization (WHO). It does not directly account for HDL
of these conditions. Type I Type I hyperlipoproteinemia exists in several forms:Lipoprotein lipase deficiency (type Ia), due to a deficiency of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) or altered apolipoprotein C2, resulting in elevated chylomicrons, the particles that transfer fatty acids from the digestive tract to
particles that transfer fatty acids from the digestive tract to the liverFamilial apoprotein CII deficiency (type Ib), a condition caused by a lack of lipoprotein lipase activator.Chylomicronemia due to circulating inhibitor of lipoprotein lipase (type Ic)Type I hyperlipoproteinemia usually presents in childhood with eruptive xanthomata and abdominal
the liverFamilial apoprotein CII deficiency (type Ib), a condition caused by a lack of lipoprotein lipase activator.Chylomicronemia due to circulating inhibitor of lipoprotein lipase (type Ic)Type I hyperlipoproteinemia usually presents in childhood with eruptive xanthomata and abdominal colic. Complications include retinal vein occlusion, acute pancreatitis
disease is about one in 500 for heterozygotes, and one in 1,000,000 for homozygotes.HLPIIa is a rare genetic disorder characterized by increased levels of LDL cholesterol in the blood due to the lack of uptake (no Apo B receptors) of LDL particles. This pathology, however,
one in 1,000,000 for homozygotes.HLPIIa is a rare genetic disorder characterized by increased levels of LDL cholesterol in the blood due to the lack of uptake (no Apo B receptors) of LDL particles. This pathology, however, is the second-most common disorder of the various
with homozygotic predisposition of one in every million. These individuals may present with a unique set of physical characteristics such as xanthelasmas (yellow deposits of fat underneath the skin often presenting in the nasal portion of the eye), tendon and tuberous xanthomas, arcus juvenilis (the graying of
mg/dL. A proper diet for these individuals requires a decrease in total fat to less than 30% of total calories with a ratio of monounsaturated:polyunsaturated:saturated fat of 1:1:1. Cholesterol should be reduced to less than 300 mg/day, thus the avoidance of animal
ratio of monounsaturated:polyunsaturated:saturated fat of 1:1:1. Cholesterol should be reduced to less than 300 mg/day, thus the avoidance of animal products and to increase fiber intake to more than 20 g/day with 6g of soluble fiber/day. Exercise should be
die before the age of 20, but if one seeks a prudent diet with correct medical intervention, the individual may see an increased incidence of xanthomas with each decade, and Achilles tendinitis and accelerated atherosclerosis will occur. Type IIb The high VLDL levels are due to overproduction of substrates
incidence of xanthomas with each decade, and Achilles tendinitis and accelerated atherosclerosis will occur. Type IIb The high VLDL levels are due to overproduction of substrates, including triglycerides, acetyl-CoA, and an increase in B-100 synthesis. They may also be caused by the decreased clearance of
of substrates, including triglycerides, acetyl-CoA, and an increase in B-100 synthesis. They may also be caused by the decreased clearance of LDL. Prevalence in the population is 10%.Familial combined hyperlipoproteinemia (FCH)Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency, often called (Cholesteryl ester storage disease)Secondary combined hyperlipoproteinemia (
IDL (intermediate density lipoprotein). Also known as broad beta disease or dysbetalipoproteinemia, the most common cause for this form is the presence of ApoE E2/E2 genotype. It is due to cholesterol-rich VLDL (β-VLDL). Its prevalence has been estimated to
hypercholesterolemia (typically 8–12 mmol/L), hypertriglyceridemia (typically 5–20 mmol/L), a normal ApoB concentration, and two types of skin signs (palmar xanthomata or orange discoloration of skin creases, and tuberoeruptive xanthomata on the elbows and knees). It is characterized by
hypertriglyceridemia (typically 5–20 mmol/L), a normal ApoB concentration, and two types of skin signs (palmar xanthomata or orange discoloration of skin creases, and tuberoeruptive xanthomata on the elbows and knees). It is characterized by the early onset of cardiovascular disease and peripheral vascular
disease and peripheral vascular disease. Remnant hyperlipidemia occurs as a result of abnormal function of the ApoE receptor, which is normally required for clearance of chylomicron remnants and IDL from the circulation. The receptor defect causes levels of chylomicron remnants and IDL to be higher than normal in the blood
function of the ApoE receptor, which is normally required for clearance of chylomicron remnants and IDL from the circulation. The receptor defect causes levels of chylomicron remnants and IDL to be higher than normal in the blood stream. The receptor defect is an autosomal recessive mutation or polymorphism. Type
.In medicine, combined hyperlipidemia (or -aemia) (also known as "multiple-type hyperlipoproteinemia") is a commonly occurring form of hypercholesterolemia (elevated cholesterol levels) characterized by increased LDL and triglyceride concentrations, often accompanied by decreased HDL. On lipoprotein electrophoresis (a test
triglyceride levels (>5 mmol/l) are generally due to an increase in very low density lipoprotein (VLDL), a class of lipoprotein prone to cause atherosclerosis.TypesFamilial combined hyperlipidemia (FCH) is the familial occurrence of this disorder, probably caused by decreased LDL receptor
decrease free fatty acid production.Statin drugs, especially the synthetic statins (atorvastatin and rosuvastatin) can decrease LDL levels by increasing hepatic reuptake of LDL due to increased LDL-receptor expression. Unclassified familial forms These unclassified forms are extremely rare:HyperalphalipoproteinemiaPolygenic hypercholesterolemiaAcquired hyperlipidemias (also called secondary
receptor expression. Unclassified familial forms These unclassified forms are extremely rare:HyperalphalipoproteinemiaPolygenic hypercholesterolemiaAcquired hyperlipidemias (also called secondary dyslipoproteinemias) often mimic primary forms of hyperlipidemia and can have similar consequences. They may result in increased risk of premature atherosclerosis or, when associated with marked hypertriglyceridemia, may lead
marked hypertriglyceridemia, may lead to pancreatitis and other complications of the chylomicronemia syndrome. The most common causes of acquired hyperlipidemia are:Diabetes mellitusUse of drugs such as thiazide diuretics, beta blockers, and estrogensOther conditions leading to acquired hyperlipidemia include:HypothyroidismKidney failureNephrotic syndromeAlcohol consumptionSome rare endocrine disorders and
of the underlying condition, when possible, or discontinuation of the offending drugs usually leads to an improvement in the hyperlipidemia.Another acquired cause of hyperlipidemia, although not always included in this category, is postprandial hyperlipidemia, a normal increase following ingestion of food.Adults 20 years and
the hyperlipidemia.Another acquired cause of hyperlipidemia, although not always included in this category, is postprandial hyperlipidemia, a normal increase following ingestion of food.Adults 20 years and older should have the cholesterol checked every four to six years. Serum level of  Low Density Lipoproteins (
cholesterol, High Density Lipoproteins (HDL) Cholesterol, and triglycerides are commonly tested in primary care setting using a lipid panel. Quantitative levels of lipoproteins and triglycerides contribute toward cardiovascular disease risk stratification via models/calculators such as Framingham Risk Score, ACC/AHA Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk
Risk Score, ACC/AHA Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk Estimator, and/or Reynolds Risk Scores. These models/calculators may also take into account of family history (heart disease and/or high blood cholesterol), age, gender, Body-Mass-Index, medical history (diabetes,
diseases.  However, screening should be done for those with known CHD or risk-equivalent conditions (e.g. Acute Coronary Syndrome, history of heart attacks, Stable or Unstable angina, Transient ischemic attacks, Peripheral arterial disease of atherosclerotic origins, coronary or other arterial revascularization).Adults 20 years
5 years. USPSTF recommends increased frequency for people with elevated risk of CHD, which may be determined using cardiovascular disease risk scores.Management of hyperlipidemia includes maintenance of a normal body weight, increased physical activity, and decreased consumption of refined carbohydrates and simple sugars. Prescription drugs may
of HMG-CoA reductase, such as lovastatin, atorvastatin, fluvastatin, pravastatin, simvastatin, rosuvastatin, and pitavastatin, inhibit the synthesis of mevalonate, a precursor molecule to cholesterol. This medication class is especially effective at decreasing elevated LDL cholesterol. Major side effects include elevated transaminases
include elevated transaminases and myopathy.Fibric acid derivatives, such as gemfibrozil and fenofibrate, function by increasing the lipolysis in adipose tissue via activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α. They decrease VLDL - very low density lipoprotein - and LDL in some people.  Major side
people.  Major side effects include rashes, GI upset, myopathy, or increased transaminases.Niacin, or vitamin B3 has a mechanism of action that is poorly understood, however it has been shown to decrease LDL cholesterol and triglycerides, and increase HDL cholesterol.  The most
. The most common side effects include bloating and diarrhea.Inhibitors of intestinal sterol absorption, such as ezetimibe, function by decreasing the absorption of cholesterol in the GI tract by targeting NPC1L1, a transport protein in the gastrointestinal wall. This results in decreased LDL cholesterol.Quitting smoking
body weight, and eating a low-salt diet that emphasizes fruits, vegetables, and whole grains can help reduce blood cholesterol.List of xanthoma variants associated with hyperlipoproteinemia subtypesCombined hyperlipidemia


flukes, and some congenital liver malformations. However, most people have no identifiable risk factors. The diagnosis is suspected based on a combination of blood tests, medical imaging, endoscopy, and sometimes surgical exploration. The disease is confirmed by examination of cells from the tumor under a
is suspected based on a combination of blood tests, medical imaging, endoscopy, and sometimes surgical exploration. The disease is confirmed by examination of cells from the tumor under a microscope. It is typically an adenocarcinoma (a cancer that forms glands or secretes mucin).Cholangiocarcinoma is typically incurable at
at diagnosis. In these cases palliative treatments may include surgical resection, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and stenting procedures. In about a third of cases involving the common bile duct and less commonly with other locations the tumor can be completely removed by surgery offering a chance of a cure
. It typically occurs in people in their 70s; however, in those with primary sclerosing cholangitis it often occurs in the 40s. Rates of cholangiocarcinoma within the liver in the Western world have increased.The most common physical indications of cholangiocarcinoma are abnormal liver function tests, jaundice (
cholangitis it often occurs in the 40s. Rates of cholangiocarcinoma within the liver in the Western world have increased.The most common physical indications of cholangiocarcinoma are abnormal liver function tests, jaundice (yellowing of the eyes and skin occurring when bile ducts are blocked by tumor), abdominal
itching (66%), weight loss (30–50%), fever (up to 20%), and changes in the color of stool or urine. To some extent, the symptoms depend upon the location of the tumor: people with cholangiocarcinoma in the extrahepatic bile ducts
more likely to have jaundice, while those with tumors of the bile ducts within the liver more often have pain without jaundice.Blood tests of liver function in people with cholangiocarcinoma often reveal a so-called "obstructive picture", with elevated bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and gamma
of the liver parenchyma, as the primary cause of the jaundice.Although most people present without any known risk factors evident, a number of risk factors for the development of cholangiocarcinoma have been described. In the Western world, the most common of these is primary sclerosing cholangitis (
the primary cause of the jaundice.Although most people present without any known risk factors evident, a number of risk factors for the development of cholangiocarcinoma have been described. In the Western world, the most common of these is primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), an inflammatory disease
Vietnam) or Clonorchis sinensis (found in China, Taiwan, eastern Russia, Korea, and Vietnam) has been associated with the development of cholangiocarcinoma. Control programs aimed at discouraging the consumption of raw and undercooked food have been successful at reducing the incidence of cholangiocarcinoma in some countries
associated with the development of cholangiocarcinoma. Control programs aimed at discouraging the consumption of raw and undercooked food have been successful at reducing the incidence of cholangiocarcinoma in some countries. People with chronic liver disease, whether in the form of viral hepatitis (e.g. hepatitis B or hepatitis C)
hepatitis B or hepatitis C), alcoholic liver disease, or cirrhosis of the liver due to other causes, are at significantly increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma. HIV infection was also identified in one study as a potential risk factor for cholangiocarcinoma, although it was unclear whether HIV itself or
of developing cholangiocarcinoma. The rare inherited disorders Lynch syndrome II and biliary papillomatosis have also been found to be associated with cholangiocarcinoma. The presence of gallstones (cholelithiasis) is not clearly associated with cholangiocarcinoma. However, intrahepatic stones (called hepatolithiasis), which are rare in the West
which are rare in the West but common in parts of Asia, have been strongly associated with cholangiocarcinoma. Exposure to Thorotrast, a form of thorium dioxide which was used as a radiologic contrast medium, has been linked to the development of cholangiocarcinoma as late as 30–40 years after exposure
cholangiocarcinoma. Exposure to Thorotrast, a form of thorium dioxide which was used as a radiologic contrast medium, has been linked to the development of cholangiocarcinoma as late as 30–40 years after exposure; Thorotrast was banned in the United States in the 1950s due to its carcinogenicity.Cholangiocarcinoma can
.Although cholangiocarcinoma is known to have the histological and molecular features of an adenocarcinoma of epithelial cells lining the biliary tract, the actual cell of origin is unknown. Recent evidence has suggested that the initial transformed cell that generates the primary tumor may arise from a pluripotent hepatic stem cell
the initial transformed cell that generates the primary tumor may arise from a pluripotent hepatic stem cell. Cholangiocarcinoma is thought to develop through a series of stages – from early hyperplasia and metaplasia, through dysplasia, to the development of frank carcinoma – in a process similar to that seen in
from early hyperplasia and metaplasia, through dysplasia, to the development of frank carcinoma – in a process similar to that seen in the development of colon cancer. Chronic inflammation and obstruction of the bile ducts, and the resulting impaired bile flow, are thought to play a role in
enough to be used as a general screening tool. However, they may be useful in conjunction with imaging methods in supporting a suspected diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma.Ultrasound of the liver and biliary tree is often used as the initial imaging modality in people with suspected obstructive jaundice. Ultrasound can
in some cases, may be sufficient to diagnose cholangiocarcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) scanning may also play an important role in the diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma.While abdominal imaging can be useful in the diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma, direct imaging of the bile ducts is often necessary. Endoscopic retrograde
tomography (CT) scanning may also play an important role in the diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma.While abdominal imaging can be useful in the diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma, direct imaging of the bile ducts is often necessary. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), an endoscopic procedure performed by a gastroenterologist
removed, or whether it is too advanced for surgical treatment to be successful. Often, this determination can only be made at the time of surgery.General guidelines for operability include:Absence of lymph node or liver metastasesAbsence of involvement of the portal veinAbsence of direct invasion of adjacent
treatment to be successful. Often, this determination can only be made at the time of surgery.General guidelines for operability include:Absence of lymph node or liver metastasesAbsence of involvement of the portal veinAbsence of direct invasion of adjacent organsAbsence of widespread metastatic diseaseCholangiocarcinoma is considered to be an
, this determination can only be made at the time of surgery.General guidelines for operability include:Absence of lymph node or liver metastasesAbsence of involvement of the portal veinAbsence of direct invasion of adjacent organsAbsence of widespread metastatic diseaseCholangiocarcinoma is considered to be an incurable and rapidly lethal disease unless
fully resected (cut out surgically). Since the operability of the tumor can only be assessed during surgery in most cases, a majority of people undergo exploratory surgery unless there is already a clear indication that the tumor is inoperable. However, the Mayo Clinic has reported significant success
unresectable cases. Locoregional therapies including transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), transarterial radioembolization (TARE) and ablation therapies have a role in intrahepatic variants of cholangiocarcinoma to provide palliation or potential cure in people who are not surgical candidates.If the tumor can be removed surgically, people may receive
surgical candidates.If the tumor can be removed surgically, people may receive adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy after the operation to improve the chances of cure. If the tissue margins are negative (i.e. the tumor has been totally excised), adjuvant therapy is of uncertain benefit. Both
was not completely removed via surgery, then adjuvant therapy with radiation and possibly chemotherapy is generally recommended based on the available data.The majority of cases of cholangiocarcinoma present as inoperable (unresectable) disease in which case people are generally treated with palliative chemotherapy, with or without radiotherapy.
completely removed via surgery, then adjuvant therapy with radiation and possibly chemotherapy is generally recommended based on the available data.The majority of cases of cholangiocarcinoma present as inoperable (unresectable) disease in which case people are generally treated with palliative chemotherapy, with or without radiotherapy. Chemotherapy has
case people are generally treated with palliative chemotherapy, with or without radiotherapy. Chemotherapy has been shown in a randomized controlled trial to improve quality of life and extend survival in people with inoperable cholangiocarcinoma. There is no single chemotherapy regimen which is universally used, and enrollment in clinical trials
few reports of its use in unresectable cholangiocarcinoma appear to show improved survival, but numbers are small.Surgical resection offers the only potential chance of cure in cholangiocarcinoma. For non-resectable cases, the 5-year survival rate is 0% where the disease is inoperable because distal
is 0% where the disease is inoperable because distal lymph nodes show metastases, and less than 5% in general. Overall mean duration of survival is less than 6 months in people with metastatic disease.For surgical cases, the odds of cure vary depending on the tumor location
% in general. Overall mean duration of survival is less than 6 months in people with metastatic disease.For surgical cases, the odds of cure vary depending on the tumor location and whether the tumor can be completely, or only partially, removed. Distal cholangiocarcinomas (those arising
are usually treated with partial hepatectomy. Various series have reported survival estimates after surgery ranging from 22–66%; the outcome may depend on involvement of lymph nodes and completeness of the surgery. Perihilar cholangiocarcinomas (those occurring near where the bile ducts exit the liver) are least likely to
is advanced. Some evidence suggests that outcomes may be improving with more aggressive surgical approaches and adjuvant therapy.Cholangiocarcinoma is a relatively rare form of cancer; each year, approximately 2,000 to 3,000 new cases are diagnosed in the United States, translating into an annual incidence of 1–2 cases
incidence of 1–2 cases per 100,000 people. Autopsy series have reported a prevalence of 0.01% to 0.46%. There is a higher prevalence of cholangiocarcinoma in Asia, which has been attributed to endemic chronic parasitic infestation. The incidence of cholangiocarcinoma increases with age, and the disease is
to 0.46%. There is a higher prevalence of cholangiocarcinoma in Asia, which has been attributed to endemic chronic parasitic infestation. The incidence of cholangiocarcinoma increases with age, and the disease is slightly more common in men than in women (possibly due to the higher rate of primary
than in women (possibly due to the higher rate of primary sclerosing cholangitis, a major risk factor, in men). The prevalence of cholangiocarcinoma in people with primary sclerosing cholangitis may be as high as 30%, based on autopsy studies.Multiple studies have documented a steady
the past several decades; increases have been seen in North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. The reasons for the increasing occurrence of cholangiocarcinoma are unclear; improved diagnostic methods may be partially responsible, but the prevalence of potential risk factors for cholangiocarcinoma, such as HIV infection
may be birth defects resulting from errors during development of the embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information
embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information or providing regulatory functions at somatic sites.Extragonadal GCTs were
classes reflect an important clinical difference. Compared to germinomatous tumors, nongerminomatous tumors tend to grow faster, have an earlier mean age at time of diagnosis ( around 25 years versus 35 years, in the case of testicular cancers), and have a lower five-year survival rate
radiation, and they also respond well to chemotherapy.  The prognosis for nongerminomatous tumours has improved dramatically, however, due to the use of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens.Mixed germ cell tumors occur in many forms.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal
.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal sinus tumor.Teratocarcinoma refers to a germ cell tumor that is a mixture of teratoma with embryonal carcinoma, or with choriocarcinoma, or with both.  This kind of mixed germ cell tumor may be known simply as
neonates, infants, and children younger than 4 years, most are sacrococcygeal teratomas.Males with Klinefelter syndrome have a 50 times greater risk of GSTs.  In these persons, GSTs usually contain nonseminomatous elements, present at an earlier age, and seldom are gonadal in location.
are being evaluated for tumors that do not respond to chemotherapy.The 1997 International Germ Cell Consensus Classification is a tool for estimating the risk of relapse after treatment of malignant germ-cell tumor.A small study of ovarian tumors in girls reports a correlation between cystic and benign tumors
can be estimated by ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan before surgery, this permits selection of the most appropriate surgical plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found
plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found that for 454 men with nonseminomatous (nongerminomatous) GCTs diagnosed between 1975 and 1989, five-year survival increased over

pleomorphic sarcoma, previously malignant fibrous histiocytoma, is a type of cancer, namely a soft-tissue sarcoma.It is considered a diagnosis of exclusion for sarcomas that cannot be more precisely categorized. Other sarcomas are cancers that form in bone and soft tissues, including muscle,
almost all cases radiation. Radiation eliminates the need for limb amputation and there is level I evidence to show that it leads to equivalent rates of survival (Rosenberg et al. NCI).  Radiation may be delivered either pre-op or post-op depending on surgeon and
et al. NCI).  Radiation may be delivered either pre-op or post-op depending on surgeon and multidisciplinary tumor board's recommendations.  Radiation can be omitted for low grade, Stage I excised tumors with >1 cm margin (NCCN).  Chemotherapy
local control.  However, neither surgery nor SBRT will prevent emergence of additional metastases elsewhere in the lung.  Therefore, the role of chemotherapy needs to be further explored to address systemic metastasis.Prognosis depends on the primary tumor grade (appearance under the microscope as judged by
appearance under the microscope as judged by a pathologist), size, resectability (whether it can be completely removed surgically), and presence of metastases.  The five-year survival rate is 80%. High expression levels of AMPD2 have been shown to correlate with poor patient
hyperplasia may produce similar symptoms. Other late symptoms include fatigue, due to low levels of red blood cells.Factors that increase the risk of prostate cancer include older age, family history and race. About 99% of cases occur after age 50. A first-degree relative
levels of red blood cells.Factors that increase the risk of prostate cancer include older age, family history and race. About 99% of cases occur after age 50. A first-degree relative with the disease increases the risk two- to three-fold. Other factors include
two- to three-fold. Other factors include a diet high in processed meat and red meat, while the risk from a high intake of milk products is inconclusive. An association with gonorrhea has been found, although no reason for this relationship has been identified. An increased risk
mineral supplementation does not appear to affect risk.Many cases are managed with active surveillance or watchful waiting. Other treatments may include a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, hormone therapy, or chemotherapy. Tumors limited to the prostate may be curable. pain medications, bisphosphonates, and
United States five-year survival rate is 98%.Globally, it is the second-most common cancer. It is the fifth-leading cause of cancer-related death in men. In 2018, it was diagnosed in 1.2 million and caused 359,000 deaths. It was the most common
those of benign prostatic hyperplasia. These include frequent urination, nocturia (increased urination at night), difficulty starting and maintaining a steady stream of urine, hematuria (blood in the urine), dysuria (painful urination) as well as fatigue due to anemia, and bone pain
. The most common symptom is bone pain, often in the vertebrae (bones of the spine), pelvis, or ribs. Spread of cancer into other bones such as the femur is usually to the part of the bone nearer to the prostate. Prostate cancer in the spine
weight. Prostate cancer is uncommon in men younger than 45, but becomes more common with advancing age. The average age at the time of diagnosis is 70. Autopsy studies of Chinese, German, Israeli, Jamaican, Swedish, and Ugandan men who died of other causes found
studies of Chinese, German, Israeli, Jamaican, Swedish, and Ugandan men who died of other causes found prostate cancer in 30% of men in their 50s, and in 80% of men in their 70s.Men with high blood pressure are more likely to develop prostate
Swedish, and Ugandan men who died of other causes found prostate cancer in 30% of men in their 50s, and in 80% of men in their 70s.Men with high blood pressure are more likely to develop prostate cancer. A small increase in risk is associated with
in their 70s.Men with high blood pressure are more likely to develop prostate cancer. A small increase in risk is associated with lack of exercise. Elevated blood testosterone levels may increase risk.Genetics may affect risk, as suggested by associations with race, family, and specific
and mortality rates for Hispanic men are one-third lower than for non-Hispanic whites. Twin studies in Scandinavia suggest that 40% of prostate cancer risk can be explained by inherited factors.Many genes are involved in prostate cancer. Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 (important risk
meat and processed meat appear to have little effect. Some studies reported that higher meat consumption was associated with higher risk.Lower blood levels of vitamin D may increase risks.  One study found no effect of folic acid supplements on risk.Some links have been established between prostate
that higher meat consumption was associated with higher risk.Lower blood levels of vitamin D may increase risks.  One study found no effect of folic acid supplements on risk.Some links have been established between prostate cancer and medications, medical procedures, and medical conditions. Statins may
suggested possible increased risk, but was still debatable.US war veterans who had been exposed to Agent Orange had a 48% increased risk of prostate cancer recurrence following surgery.Although some evidence from prospective cohort studies indicates that frequent ejaculation may reduce prostate cancer risk, no randomized controlled
which make about 20% of the fluid constituting semen.Superiorly, the prostate base is contiguous with the bladder outlet. Inferiorly, the prostate's apex heads in the direction of the urogenital diaphragm, which is pointed anterio-inferiorly. The prostate can be divided into four anatomic spaces
make about 20% of the fluid constituting semen.Superiorly, the prostate base is contiguous with the bladder outlet. Inferiorly, the prostate's apex heads in the direction of the urogenital diaphragm, which is pointed anterio-inferiorly. The prostate can be divided into four anatomic spaces
testosterone within the prostate itself. Androgens are also responsible for secondary sex characteristics such as facial hair and increased muscle mass.Because of the prostate's location, prostate diseases often affect urination, ejaculation, and rarely defecation. In prostate cancer, the cells of these glands mutate into cancer
within the prostate itself. Androgens are also responsible for secondary sex characteristics such as facial hair and increased muscle mass.Because of the prostate's location, prostate diseases often affect urination, ejaculation, and rarely defecation. In prostate cancer, the cells of these glands mutate into cancer
mutate into cancer cells. The region of the prostate gland where the adenocarcinoma is most common is the peripheral zone. Initially, small clumps of cancer cells remain within otherwise normal prostate glands, a condition known as carcinoma in situ or prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). Although no
commonly metastasizes to the bones and lymph nodes, and may invade the rectum, bladder, and lower ureters after local progression. The route of metastasis to bone is thought to be venous, as the prostatic venous plexus draining the prostate connects with the vertebral veins.The prostate is
with the vertebral veins.The prostate is a zinc-accumulating, citrate-producing organ. Transport protein ZIP1 is responsible for the transport of zinc into prostate cells. One of zinc's important roles is to change the cell's metabolism to produce citrate, an important semen component
organ. Transport protein ZIP1 is responsible for the transport of zinc into prostate cells. One of zinc's important roles is to change the cell's metabolism to produce citrate, an important semen component. The process of zinc accumulation, alteration of metabolism, and citrate production is energy inefficient
. Transport protein ZIP1 is responsible for the transport of zinc into prostate cells. One of zinc's important roles is to change the cell's metabolism to produce citrate, an important semen component. The process of zinc accumulation, alteration of metabolism, and citrate production is energy inefficient
cells. One of zinc's important roles is to change the cell's metabolism to produce citrate, an important semen component. The process of zinc accumulation, alteration of metabolism, and citrate production is energy inefficient, and prostate cells require enormous amounts of energy (ATP) to
's important roles is to change the cell's metabolism to produce citrate, an important semen component. The process of zinc accumulation, alteration of metabolism, and citrate production is energy inefficient, and prostate cells require enormous amounts of energy (ATP) to accomplish this task. Prostate
semen component. The process of zinc accumulation, alteration of metabolism, and citrate production is energy inefficient, and prostate cells require enormous amounts of energy (ATP) to accomplish this task. Prostate cancer cells are generally devoid of zinc. Prostate cancer cells save energy by not making
zinc. Prostate cancer cells save energy by not making citrate, and use the conserved energy to grow, reproduce and spread.The absence of zinc is thought to occur via silencing the gene that produces ZIP1. It is called a tumor suppressor gene product for the gene SLC39A1.
these cells in animals. Zinc inhibits NF-κB pathways, is antiproliferative, and induces apoptosis in abnormal cells. Unfortunately, oral ingestion of zinc is ineffective since high concentrations of zinc into prostate cells is not possible without ZIP1.Loss of cancer suppressor genes, early in prostatic carcinogenesis,
NF-κB pathways, is antiproliferative, and induces apoptosis in abnormal cells. Unfortunately, oral ingestion of zinc is ineffective since high concentrations of zinc into prostate cells is not possible without ZIP1.Loss of cancer suppressor genes, early in prostatic carcinogenesis, have been localized to chromosomes 8p,
apoptosis in abnormal cells. Unfortunately, oral ingestion of zinc is ineffective since high concentrations of zinc into prostate cells is not possible without ZIP1.Loss of cancer suppressor genes, early in prostatic carcinogenesis, have been localized to chromosomes 8p, 10q, 13q, and 16q. P53 mutations in
event in the pathology. Other tumor suppressor genes that are thought to play a role include PTEN and KAI1. "Up to 70 percent of men with prostate cancer have lost one copy of the PTEN gene at the time of diagnosis". Relative frequency of loss of E-
include PTEN and KAI1. "Up to 70 percent of men with prostate cancer have lost one copy of the PTEN gene at the time of diagnosis". Relative frequency of loss of E-cadherin and CD44 has also been observed. Loss of the retinoblastoma (RB) protein
Up to 70 percent of men with prostate cancer have lost one copy of the PTEN gene at the time of diagnosis". Relative frequency of loss of E-cadherin and CD44 has also been observed. Loss of the retinoblastoma (RB) protein induces androgen receptor deregulation in castration
beta/SMAD signaling cascade to ensure cancer cell survival and protect against apoptosis. Pim-1 is upregulated in prostate cancer. X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) is hypothesized to promote cancer cell survival and growth. Macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1 (MIC-1) stimulates the focal adhesion kinase (
glutamated folates.The American Cancer Society's position regarding early detection by PSA testing is:Research has not yet proven that the potential benefits of testing outweigh the harms of testing and treatment. The American Cancer Society believes that men should not be tested without learning about what we know
Cancer Society's position regarding early detection by PSA testing is:Research has not yet proven that the potential benefits of testing outweigh the harms of testing and treatment. The American Cancer Society believes that men should not be tested without learning about what we know and don’t know about
American Cancer Society believes that men should not be tested without learning about what we know and don’t know about the risks and possible benefits of testing and treatment. Starting at age 50, (45 if African American or brother or father suffered from condition before age 65) talk
, (45 if African American or brother or father suffered from condition before age 65) talk to your doctor about the pros and cons of testing so you can decide if testing is the right choice for you."Several other tests can be used to gather information about the prostate
creates a picture of the prostate using sound waves from a probe in the rectum, but the only test that can fully confirm the diagnosis of prostate cancer is a biopsy, the removal of small pieces of the prostate for microscopic examination.Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
microscopic examination.Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are the two main imaging methods used for prostate cancer detection. MRI  Appearance of prostate on MRI On MRI, the central and transitional zones both have lower T2 signal than the peripheral zone. Since the central and transitional
lateral prostate have a low T2WI signal, in contrast with the bright signal of the peripheral zone. Extraprostatic extension can be seen with disruption of capsule integrity. MRI for the detection of prostate cancer As of 2011, MRI was used to identify targets for prostate biopsy using fusion MRI
in contrast with the bright signal of the peripheral zone. Extraprostatic extension can be seen with disruption of capsule integrity. MRI for the detection of prostate cancer As of 2011, MRI was used to identify targets for prostate biopsy using fusion MRI with ultrasound (US) or MRI-
to 26% in the standard biopsy group. In candidates for active surveillance, fusion MR/US-guided prostate biopsy detected 33% of cancers compared to 7% with standard ultrasound-guided biopsy.Following an MRI, regions of interest within the scan which may be cancer
US-guided prostate biopsy detected 33% of cancers compared to 7% with standard ultrasound-guided biopsy.Following an MRI, regions of interest within the scan which may be cancer are often graded on a likelihood scale between 1 and 5. One such scale is the prostate
and reporting. PI-RADS version 2 scoring has shown a specificity and sensitivity of 73% and 95%, respectively, for detection of prostate cancer. Other uses for MRI Prostate MRI is also used for surgical planning for robotic prostatectomy. It helps surgeons decide whether to resect
to resect or spare the neurovascular bundle, determine return to urinary continence, and help assess surgical difficulty. MRI is used in other types of treatment planning, for both focal therapy and radiotherapy. MRI can also be used to target areas for research sampling in biobanking. Biological basis
tumour is visible on MRI is poorly understood. One theory is that tumour cells undergo several genetic changes during transformation which alter the cellular rate of growth and formation of new blood vessels, leading to tumours with more aggressive histological patterns, hypoxic regions and increased cell density among other features
cell density among other features. Having larger, more dense tumours with changes in blood vessel distributions may feasibly alter signal on MRI through restriction of water and/or fluid movement.Some studies have linked the presence of rare histological patterns within the tumour such as cribriform pattern. Although recent research
including processes such as cell proliferation, tumour hypoxia and DNA damage.  The gene changes consistently observed in MRI-visible tumours include loss of tumour suppressor PTEN, increased expression of proliferation associated genes CENPF, AGR2 and growth factor GDF15 as well as a number of other genes.
tumour hypoxia and DNA damage.  The gene changes consistently observed in MRI-visible tumours include loss of tumour suppressor PTEN, increased expression of proliferation associated genes CENPF, AGR2 and growth factor GDF15 as well as a number of other genes. Changes in these pathways and genes may
on MRI.Ultrasound imaging can be obtained transrectally and is used during prostate biopsies. Prostate cancer can be seen as a hypoechoic lesion in 60% of cases. The other 40% of cancerous lesions are either hyperechoic or isoechoic. On Color Doppler, the lesions appear hypervascular.If cancer
prevent complications such as fever, urinary tract infections, and sepsis even if the most appropriate course or dose is undefined. About 55% of men report discomfort during prostate biopsy. Histopathologic diagnosis A histopathologic diagnosis mainly includes assessment of whether a cancer exists, as well as any subdiagnosis
. Histopathologic subdiagnosis has implications for the possibility and methodology of Gleason scoring. The most common histopathological subdiagnosis is acinar adenocarcinoma, constituting 93% of diagnoses. The most common form of acinar adenocarcinoma, in turn, is "adenocarcinoma, not otherwise specified", also termed conventional,
. Gleason score The Gleason grading system is used to help evaluate the prognosis and helps guide therapy. A Gleason score is based upon the tumor's appearance. Cancers with a higher Gleason score are more aggressive and have a worse prognosis. Pathological scores range from 2 through 10, with
Gleason score The Gleason grading system is used to help evaluate the prognosis and helps guide therapy. A Gleason score is based upon the tumor's appearance. Cancers with a higher Gleason score are more aggressive and have a worse prognosis. Pathological scores range from 2 through 10, with
2009 researchers were investigating ways to screen for this type, because it is quick to metastasize.The oncoprotein BCL-2 is associated with the development of androgen-independent prostate cancer, due to its high levels of expression in androgen-independent tumours in advanced stages. The upregulation of BCL-2
it is quick to metastasize.The oncoprotein BCL-2 is associated with the development of androgen-independent prostate cancer, due to its high levels of expression in androgen-independent tumours in advanced stages. The upregulation of BCL-2 after androgen ablation in prostate carcinoma cell lines and in a castrated
further established a connection between BCL-2 expression and prostate cancer progression.An important part of evaluating prostate cancer is determining the stage, or degree of spread. Knowing the stage helps define prognosis and is useful when selecting therapies. The most common system is the four-stage TNM system
T2 cancers are found only in the prostate, while T3 and T4 cancers have metastasized. Several tests can be used to look for evidence of spread. Medical specialty professional organizations recommend against the use of PET scans, CT scans, or bone scans when a physician stages early prostate
magnetic resonance imaging evaluates the prostatic capsule and the seminal vesicles. Bone scans should reveal osteoblastic appearance due to increased bone density in the areas of bone metastasis—the reverse of what is found in many other metastatic cancers.After a biopsy, a pathologist examines the samples under a
is a suitable replacement for conventional imaging.				The data on the relationship between diet and prostate cancer are poor. However, the rate of prostate cancer is linked to the consumption of the Western diet. Little if any evidence associates trans fat, saturated fat, and carbohydrate intake
to advanced prostate cancer.Fish may lower prostate-cancer deaths, but does not appear to affect occurrence. Some evidence supports lower rates of prostate cancer with a vegetarian diet/, lycopene, selenium cruciferous vegetables, soy, beans and/or other legumes.Regular exercise may slightly lower risk
especially vigorous activity.In those who are regularly screened, 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors (finasteride and dutasteride) reduce the overall risk of prostate cancer. Data are insufficient to determine if they affect fatality risk and they may increase the chance of more serious cases.Prostate cancer
and the PSA blood test. Such screening is controversial, and for many, may lead to unnecessary disruption and possibly harmful consequences. Harms of population-based screening, primarily due to overdiagnosis (the detection of latent cancers that would have otherwise not been discovered) may outweigh the
Task Force (USPSTF) suggests the decision whether to have PSA screening be based on consultation with a physician for men 55 to 69 years of age. USPSTF recommends against PSA screening after age 70. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention endorsed USPSTF's conclusion. The American Society
are worth the harms associated with screening and subsequent unnecessary treatment."American Urological Association (AUA 2013) guidelines call for weighing the uncertain benefits of screening against the known harms associated with diagnostic tests and treatment. The AUA recommends that shared decision-making should control screening for those 55
best depends on disease stage, the Gleason score, and the PSA level. Other important factors are age, general health and a person's views about potential treatments and their possible side effects. Because most treatments can have significant side effects, such as erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence
. Because most treatments can have significant side effects, such as erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence, treatment discussions often focus on balancing the goals of therapy with the risks of lifestyle alterations. A 2017 review found that more research focused on person-centered outcomes is needed to guide patients
have significant side effects, such as erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence, treatment discussions often focus on balancing the goals of therapy with the risks of lifestyle alterations. A 2017 review found that more research focused on person-centered outcomes is needed to guide patients. A combination of treatment
risks of lifestyle alterations. A 2017 review found that more research focused on person-centered outcomes is needed to guide patients. A combination of treatment options is often recommended.Although the widespread use of PSA screening in the US has resulted in diagnosis at earlier age and cancer stage
options such as radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy and are instead treated with hormonal therapy or watchful waiting.Guidelines for specific clinical situations require estimation of life expectancy. As average life expectancy increases due to advances in the treatment of other diseases, more patients will live long enough for their
-risk prostate cancer are eligible for active surveillance. The tumor is carefully observed over time, with the intention of initiating treatment if signs of progression appear. Active surveillance is not synonymous with watchful waiting, a term which implies no treatment or specific program of monitoring, with the
initiating treatment if signs of progression appear. Active surveillance is not synonymous with watchful waiting, a term which implies no treatment or specific program of monitoring, with the assumption that only palliative treatment would be used if advanced, symptomatic disease develops.Active surveillance involves monitoring the tumor for
may cause anxiety for people who wrongly believe that all cancers are deadly or that their condition is life-threatening. 50 to 75% of patients die from other causes without experiencing prostate symptoms. In localized disease, neither radical prostatectomy nor watchful waiting has shown clearly superior results.
testosterone levels are lowered by hormonal therapy is called castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Many early-stage cancers need normal levels of testosterone to grow, but CRPC does not. Previously considered "hormone-refractory prostate cancer" or "androgen-independent prostate cancer"
as treatment for CRPC with a median survival benefit of 2 to 3 months. A second-line chemotherapy treatment is cabazitaxel. A combination of bevacizumab, docetaxel, thalidomide and prednisone appears effective in the treatment of CRPC.Immunotherapy treatment with sipuleucel-T in CRPC appeared to increase survival by
these combination will not affect stem-like cells that do not exhibit androgen signaling. Surgery Radical prostatectomy is considered the mainstay of surgical treatment of prostate cancer, where the surgeon removes the prostate, seminal vesicles, and surrounding lymph nodes. It can be done by an open technique
lead to incompetent closure of the urethra and hence incontinence. Initial therapy includes bladder training, lifestyle changes, kegel exercises, and the use of incontinence pads. More invasive surgical treatment can include the insertion of a urethral sling or an artificial urinary sphincter, which is a mechanical device
years. One study reported that African-Americans have 50–60 times more deaths than found in Shanghai, China. In Nigeria, 2% of men develop prostate cancer, and 64% of them are dead after 2 years. Most Nigerian men present with metastatic disease with a typical
Nigerian men present with metastatic disease with a typical survival of 40 months.In patients who undergo treatment, the most important clinical prognostic indicators of disease outcome are the stage, pretherapy PSA level, and Gleason score. The higher the grade and the stage, the poorer the prognosis
prognosis. Nomograms can be used to calculate the estimated risk of the individual patient. The predictions are based on the experience of large groups of patients. A complicating factor is that the majority of patients have multiple independent tumor foci upon diagnosis, and these foci have independent genetic changes
risk of the individual patient. The predictions are based on the experience of large groups of patients. A complicating factor is that the majority of patients have multiple independent tumor foci upon diagnosis, and these foci have independent genetic changes and molecular features. Because of this extensive inter-
heterogeneity, it is a risk that the prognostication is set based on the wrong tumor focus.Androgen ablation therapy causes remission in 80–90% of patients undergoing therapy, resulting in a median progression-free survival of 12 to 33 months. After remission, an androgen-independent phenotype
to 33 months. After remission, an androgen-independent phenotype typically emerges, wherein the median overall survival is 23–37 months from the time of initiation of androgen ablation therapy. How androgen-independence is established and how it re-establishes progression is unclear.Several tools are available
months. After remission, an androgen-independent phenotype typically emerges, wherein the median overall survival is 23–37 months from the time of initiation of androgen ablation therapy. How androgen-independence is established and how it re-establishes progression is unclear.Several tools are available to help
stage and recurrence after surgery or radiation therapy. Most combine stage, grade, and PSA level, and some include the number or percentage of biopsy cores positive, age, and/or other information.The D'Amico classification stratifies men by low, intermediate, or high risk based on stage
variables and are published as lookup tables.The Kattan nomograms predict recurrence after surgery and/or radiation therapy, based on data available at the time of diagnosis or after surgery. The Kattan score represents the likelihood of remaining free of disease at a given time interval following treatment.The UCSF
nomogram and can be calculated without tables or a calculator. Points are assigned based on PSA, grade, stage, age, and percentage of cores positive; the sum yields a 0–10 score, with every two points representing roughly a doubling of risk of recurrence. The CAPRA score
, stage, age, and percentage of cores positive; the sum yields a 0–10 score, with every two points representing roughly a doubling of risk of recurrence. The CAPRA score was derived from community-based data in the CaPSURE database. It has been validated among over 10,000
, age, and percentage of cores positive; the sum yields a 0–10 score, with every two points representing roughly a doubling of risk of recurrence. The CAPRA score was derived from community-based data in the CaPSURE database. It has been validated among over 10,000 prostatectomy patients
medical and lifestyle factors modify these numbers. For example, studies have shown that a 40-year-old man will lose 3.1 years of life if he is overweight (BMI 25–29) and 5.8 years of life if he is obese (BMI 30 or more), compared
shown that a 40-year-old man will lose 3.1 years of life if he is overweight (BMI 25–29) and 5.8 years of life if he is obese (BMI 30 or more), compared to men of normal weight. If he is both overweight and a
not suggest that it does.Men with low-grade disease (Gleason 2–4) were unlikely to die of prostate cancer within 15 years of diagnosis. Older men (age 70–75) with low-grade disease had a roughly 20% overall survival at 15 years due to deaths
at 15 years due to deaths from competing causes. Men with high-grade disease (Gleason 8–10) experienced high mortality within 15 years of diagnosis, regardless of their age.As of 2012, prostate cancer is the second-most frequently diagnosed cancer (at 15% of
2012, prostate cancer is the second-most frequently diagnosed cancer (at 15% of all male cancers) and the sixth leading cause of cancer death in males worldwide. In 2010, prostate cancer resulted in 256,000 deaths, up from 156,000 deaths in 1990. Rates of prostate
cause of cancer death in males worldwide. In 2010, prostate cancer resulted in 256,000 deaths, up from 156,000 deaths in 1990. Rates of prostate cancer vary widely. Rates vary widely between countries. It is least common in South and East Asia, and more common in Europe
Prostate cancer is least common among Asian men and most common among black men, with white men in between.The average annual incidence rate of prostate cancer between 1988 and 1992 among Chinese men in the United States was 15 times higher than that of their counterparts living in Shanghai and
States was 15 times higher than that of their counterparts living in Shanghai and Tianjin, but these high rates may be affected by higher rates of detection. Many suggest that prostate cancer may be under-reported, yet BPH incidence in China and Japan is similar to rates in Western
cancer may be under-reported, yet BPH incidence in China and Japan is similar to rates in Western countries.More than 80% of men develop prostate cancer by age 80.Prostate cancer is the third-leading cause of cancer death in men, exceeded by lung cancer and colorectal
similar to rates in Western countries.More than 80% of men develop prostate cancer by age 80.Prostate cancer is the third-leading cause of cancer death in men, exceeded by lung cancer and colorectal cancer. It accounts for 19% of all male cancers and 9% of
and improved treatment. The estimated lifetime risk is about 14.0%, and the lifetime mortality risk is 2.6%.Between 2005 and 2011, the proportion of disease diagnosed at a locoregional stage was 93% for whites and 92% for African Americans; the proportion of disease diagnosed at a late
and 2011, the proportion of disease diagnosed at a locoregional stage was 93% for whites and 92% for African Americans; the proportion of disease diagnosed at a late stage was 4% for whites and 5% for African Americans.Prostate cancer is more common in the African
also found an increase in occult prostate cancer with age, reaching nearly 60% in men older than 80 years. More than 50% of cancers in Asian men and 25% of cancers in White men had a Gleason score of 7 or greater, suggesting that Gleason score may
with age, reaching nearly 60% in men older than 80 years. More than 50% of cancers in Asian men and 25% of cancers in White men had a Gleason score of 7 or greater, suggesting that Gleason score may be an imprecise indicator of clinically insignificant cases
7 or greater, suggesting that Gleason score may be an imprecise indicator of clinically insignificant cases.Prostate cancer is the third-leading type of cancer in Canadian men. In 2016, around 4,000 died and 21,600 men were diagnosed with prostate cancer.In Europe in 2012, it
-most diagnosed cancer after breast and colorectal cancers at 417,000 cases.In the United Kingdom, it is the second-most common cause of cancer death after lung cancer, where around 35,000 cases are diagnosed every year, of which around 10,000 are fatal.The prostate was first
cancer was first performed in the 1890s, with limited success. Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) replaced radical prostatectomy for symptomatic relief of obstruction in the middle of the 20th century because it could better preserve penile erectile function. Radical retropubic prostatectomy was developed in 1983 by Patrick
implanted seeds (for prostate cancer) was first described in 1983.Systemic chemotherapy for prostate cancer was first studied in the 1970s. The initial regimen of cyclophosphamide and 5-fluorouracil was quickly joined by regimens using other systemic chemotherapy drugs.Enzalutamide gained FDA approval in 2012 for the treatment of
of cyclophosphamide and 5-fluorouracil was quickly joined by regimens using other systemic chemotherapy drugs.Enzalutamide gained FDA approval in 2012 for the treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Alpharadin won FDA approval in 2013, under the priority review program.In 2006, a
in the United Kingdom by both the government and by cancer charities such as Cancer Research UK. Critics cite such figures when claiming that women's health is favored over men's health.Disparities extend into detection, with governments failing to fund or mandate prostate cancer screening while fully supporting
the government and by cancer charities such as Cancer Research UK. Critics cite such figures when claiming that women's health is favored over men's health.Disparities extend into detection, with governments failing to fund or mandate prostate cancer screening while fully supporting breast cancer programs. For example
media coverage than other, equally prevalent cancers, outcovered 2.6:1 by breast cancer.Prostate Cancer Awareness Month takes place in September in a number of countries. A light blue ribbon is used to promote the cause.Enzalutamide is a nonsteroidal antiandrogen (NSAA).Alpharadin uses bone targeted Radium-223 isotopes to
in treating prostate cancers that are resistant to current therapies.Arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase has been identified as playing a significant role in the survival of prostate cancer cells. Medications that target this enzyme are undergoing development. In particular, arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors produce massive, rapid programmed
cells express AR, but PC-3 and DU-145 cells express very little or no AR.The proliferation of LNCaP cells is androgen-dependent but the proliferation of PC-3 and DU-145 cells is androgen-insensitive. Elevation of AR expression is often observed in advanced prostate tumors in patients. Some androgen-
tumors in patients. Some androgen-independent LNCaP sublines have been developed from the ATCC androgen-dependent LNCaP cells after androgen deprivation for study of prostate cancer progression. These androgen-independent LNCaP cells have elevated AR expression and express prostate specific antigen upon androgen treatment. Paradoxically, androgens
the proliferation of these androgen-independent prostate cancer cells.One active research area and non-clinically applied investigations involves non-invasive methods of tumor detection. A molecular test that detects the presence of cell-associated PCA3 mRNA in fluid obtained from the prostate and first-void
One active research area and non-clinically applied investigations involves non-invasive methods of tumor detection. A molecular test that detects the presence of cell-associated PCA3 mRNA in fluid obtained from the prostate and first-void urine sample is under investigation. PCA3 mRNA is expressed almost
cells and has been shown to be highly over-expressed in prostate cancer cells. The test result is currently reported as a specimen ratio of PCA3 mRNA to PSA mRNA.The PCA3 test attempts to help decide whether, in men suspected of having prostate cancer (especially if an initial biopsy
). The two most common cancers that spread to the eye from another organ are breast cancer and lung cancer. Other less common sites of origin include the prostate, kidney, thyroid, skin, colon and blood or bone marrow.Tumors in the eye and orbit can be
can occur in the ciliary body and the uvea of the eye.Orbital dermoid cysts are benign choristomas which are typically found at the junction of sutures, most commonly at the fronto-zygomatic suture. Large deep orbital dermoid cysts can cause pressure effects on the muscles and optic nerve
fronto-zygomatic suture. Large deep orbital dermoid cysts can cause pressure effects on the muscles and optic nerve, leading to diplopia and loss of vision.Melanomas (choroidal, ciliary body and uveal) -  In the early stages there may be no symptoms (the person does
should be checked out.Retinoblastoma -  Strabismus (crossed eyes), a whitish or yellowish glow through the pupil, decreasing/loss of vision, sometimes the eye may be red and painful. Retinoblastoma can occur in one or both eyes. This tumor occurs in babies and
have the red eye reflex, but a white/yellow dot instead of the red eye reflex can indicate a tumor or some other kind of eye disease. Any photos of a child/children which have a white/yellow dot instead of the red eye reflex should be evaluated
PAM with atypiaPigmented conjunctival tumorsPingueculumPterygiumSquamous carcinoma and intraepithelial neoplasia of the conjunctivaLaser therapyPlaque therapyRadiotherapy - The ophthalmologist decides in conjunction with the radiation oncologist which type of radiation therapy is most suitable, based on size and location of the tumour. Today, modern radiation treatment modalities, such as proton therapy
Cutting into the eye to remove a tumor e.g. melanoma.  This operation can be quite difficult to perform.ChemotherapyOcular oncology is the branch of medicine dealing with tumors relating to the eye and its adnexa.Ocular oncology takes into consideration that the primary requirement for patients is preservation of
of medicine dealing with tumors relating to the eye and its adnexa.Ocular oncology takes into consideration that the primary requirement for patients is preservation of life by removal of the tumor, along with best efforts directed at preservation of useful vision, followed by cosmetic appearance. The treatment of
ophthalmologist, medical oncologist, radiation specialist, head & neck surgeon/ENT surgeon, pediatrician/internal medicine/hospitalist and a multidisciplinary team of support staff and nurses.William Charles Caccamise Sr. "A photographic cache of eyelid and conjunctival malignant lesions". EyeRounds.org. Archived from
, pediatrician/internal medicine/hospitalist and a multidisciplinary team of support staff and nurses.William Charles Caccamise Sr. "A photographic cache of eyelid and conjunctival malignant lesions". EyeRounds.org. Archived from the original on 2006-08-29. Retrieved 2006-10-11.Eye
pheochromocytoma develops outside the adrenal gland, it is referred to as a paraganglioma. These neuroendocrine tumors are capable of producing and releasing massive amounts of catecholamines, metanephrines, or methoxytyramine, which result in the most common symptoms, including hypertension (high blood pressure), tachycardia (fast
and diaphoresis (excessive sweating, particularly at night). However, patients are unlikely to experience continuous symptoms. Due to the paroxysmal nature of catecholamine synthesis and release, patients may experience "attacks" or "spells" where they are suddenly overwhelmed with signs and symptoms of their
of a pheochromocytoma are quite common, the disease has been referred to as "the great mimic". Literature reports that just 0.1% of patients with hypertension are diagnosed with this rare endocrine disorder and symptomatic patients are often mistaken for much more common diseases. As symptoms are often
on its own." Furthermore, when pictured in the ideal clinical scenario (an older woman in her mid-50s), the spontaneous attacks of flushing, sweating, and a racing heart may be mistaken for pre-menopausal related hot-flashes. Unmanaged pheochromocytoma is dangerous and can
prevent further damage to other organs and/or death.Myocardial Ischemia/Infarction: A heart attack is often caused by a significant build-up of plaque (atherosclerosis) in the coronary vessels. Patients with pheochromocytoma present with myocardial infarctions despite an overall lack of plaque build-up,
a significant build-up of plaque (atherosclerosis) in the coronary vessels. Patients with pheochromocytoma present with myocardial infarctions despite an overall lack of plaque build-up, indicating a different mechanism for the myocardial infarction. Current research hypothesizes that the tumor secretes massive amounts of catecholamines,
overall lack of plaque build-up, indicating a different mechanism for the myocardial infarction. Current research hypothesizes that the tumor secretes massive amounts of catecholamines, which directly interact with myocardial (heart) tissue and exert negative effects including oxygen deprivation, leading to accelerated scarring and cell death
changes on an ECG. Norepinephrine (a catecholamine) is hypothesized to resulted in damaged cardiac tissue by inhibiting coronary blood flow and depriving cells of oxygen, thus resulting in ischemic tissue. Fortunately, following tumor excision and the subsequent quelling of catecholamines, the damage has been proven reversible
by inhibiting coronary blood flow and depriving cells of oxygen, thus resulting in ischemic tissue. Fortunately, following tumor excision and the subsequent quelling of catecholamines, the damage has been proven reversible.Cardiomyopathy: Pheochromocytoma's have been implicated in various types of cardiomyopathy, including (myocarditis,
tumor excision and the subsequent quelling of catecholamines, the damage has been proven reversible.Cardiomyopathy: Pheochromocytoma's have been implicated in various types of cardiomyopathy, including (myocarditis, see above), dilated cardiomyopathy, and stress-induced or Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. As with the other cardiovascular
of studied patients report their pain began and ended abruptly without warning and described the pain as a severe, bilateral throbbing (although the scale of severity was not published). While 71% of the studied patients reported headaches, just over 20% of the affected patients endorsed associated
): Caused by an elevated inflammatory response, multiple organ dysfunction is a severe, life-threatening emergency with increasing mortality based on the number of systems involved. Pheochromocytoma-related MODS is associated with multiple organ failure, hyperthermia > 40 degrees Celsius, neurologic manifestations, and cardiovascular instability
.Current estimates predict that upwards of 40% of all pheochromocytomas are related to an inherited germline susceptibility mutation. Of the remaining 60% of tumors, more than 30% are associated with a somatic mutation. Given the high association with genetic inheritance, the United States Endocrine Society
characteristics, and may respond more favorably to certain treatment options. Furthermore, early identification can guide physicians on screening recommendations for first degree relatives of patients with pheochromocytoma. There is no current consensus for how and when asymptomatic carriers (individual who has a genetic variant associated with pheochromocytoma,
There is no current consensus for how and when asymptomatic carriers (individual who has a genetic variant associated with pheochromocytoma, but no current evidence of disease) should be evaluated. Conversations should occur at an individual level with the patient and their provider to develop a personalized screening plan that
geneticist, parent, and child) where the primary focus is supporting the child.A positive result from testing during family-observed days of celebration may mask the happiness associated with these events in the future.Testing one pediatric sibling at a time allows the family to narrow their
associated susceptibility genes:Pacak-Zhuang SyndromeHypoxia-inducible factor 2 alpha (HIF2A)PolycythemiaDuodenal somatostatinomaRetinal and choroidal vascular changesParaganglioma/PheochromocytomaPheochromocytoma and Giant Cell Tumor of BoneH3 histone, family 3A (H3F3A), post-zygotic G34WPheochromocytoma/ParagangliomaCarney TriadGastrointestinal stromal tumorPulmonary chondromaParagangliomaCarney-Stratakis SyndromeGastrointestinal stromal tumorParagangliomaSeveral additional gene
(1) conditions of the collection, (2) all medications the patient is taking, and (3) their diet.Conditions of Collection: Unlike many routine laboratory tests that can be drawn at a moments notice, there are several recommendations that should be followed to ensure
false-positive results.Pharmaceutical Interference: Many prescription, over-the-counter, and illicit substances can interfere with the proper collection of plasma metanephrines and lead to false-positive results. Providers should review a patient's medication list in-detail and have a discussion if
, and illicit substances can interfere with the proper collection of plasma metanephrines and lead to false-positive results. Providers should review a patient's medication list in-detail and have a discussion if temporarily discontinuing any of the interfering medications is possible. The most reported medications to result
four hour urinary metanephrines are an acceptable alternative if the plasma test is unavailable. Other additional biomarkers can be helpful to aid in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma as well, most notable is Chromogranin A. In comparison to the specificity of elevated catecholamines in the pheochromocytoma patient, chromogranin A is a
physician - the first step is to repeat the labs, taking extra precautions to follow the gold standard diagnosis described above, including the conditions of collection, pharmaceutical interference, and any potential diet and lifestyle habits that could alter the results. If the offending medications cannot be discontinued
generalized weakness) limit compliance and have vastly diminished prescriptions. While the adverse side-effects with clonidine are inconvenient, the most dangerous aspect of clonidine is withdrawal rebound hypertension - that is, when the medicine is abruptly discontinued, blood pressure may rapidly return or surpass the original value
head and neck. Further research indicates that the biomarker is also a useful indicator of metastatic disease - which is the only current biochemical evidence of metastases to date. Biochemical phenotypes While diagnostic, laboratory values can also provide physician's with important information about the type, location, size
.Adrenergic (Epinephrine and metanephrine)More likely to indicate an adrenal tumorWhen plasma metanephrine levels were elevated to greater than 15% of the combined levels of normetanephrine and metanephrine, an adrenal tumor or a recurrence of an adrenal tumor that had already been excised can be predictedPatients are more likely to
extra-adrenal tumor of the head and neckPatients are more likely to be asymptomatic; however, they may present with non-specific signs of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and weight loss secondary to the stimulation of dopamine receptors throughout the gastrointestinal tractParticularly prevalent in patients
, they may present with non-specific signs of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and weight loss secondary to the stimulation of dopamine receptors throughout the gastrointestinal tractParticularly prevalent in patients with succinate dehydrogenase subunit B genetic variants Across both an adrenergic and a noradrenergic phenotype, the
the gastrointestinal tractParticularly prevalent in patients with succinate dehydrogenase subunit B genetic variants Across both an adrenergic and a noradrenergic phenotype, the greater the sum of plasma or urinary concentrations of metanephrine and normetanephrine, the larger the expected tumor diameter. Anatomic imaging Anatomic imaging refers to computed tomography (CT
patients with succinate dehydrogenase subunit B genetic variants Across both an adrenergic and a noradrenergic phenotype, the greater the sum of plasma or urinary concentrations of metanephrine and normetanephrine, the larger the expected tumor diameter. Anatomic imaging Anatomic imaging refers to computed tomography (CT) [CAT scan]
and should therefore be avoided in patients with pre-existing damage. However, patients who struggle with being in confined spaces for extended periods of time (claustrophobia) cannot often tolerate an MR as the machine is close-ended compared to the open-ended design of a
excision. For most pheochromocytoma patients, functional imaging will follow a CT or MR. If anatomic imaging only demonstrates an adrenal tumor without evidence of disease anywhere else in the body and the metanephrine levels are overtly elevated, functional imaging can be foregone in favor of prompt surgical excision.
. There are several  medication options depending on the clinical scenario, each with their own associated strengths and weaknesses. Alpha blockade If the patient's blood pressure is moderately elevated, a selective, short-acting alpha-1 adrenoceptor antagonist (doxazosin, prazosin, terazosin) is the preferred agent
There are several  medication options depending on the clinical scenario, each with their own associated strengths and weaknesses. Alpha blockade If the patient's blood pressure is moderately elevated, a selective, short-acting alpha-1 adrenoceptor antagonist (doxazosin, prazosin, terazosin) is the preferred agent
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists should not be given alone in a pheochromocytoma patient - this can lead to severe consequences. In 1995, a team of physicians from London described the death of a person who had been recently diagnosed pheochromocytoma after initiation of propranolol, a non-selective beta blocker
severe consequences. In 1995, a team of physicians from London described the death of a person who had been recently diagnosed pheochromocytoma after initiation of propranolol, a non-selective beta blocker. She quickly developed a hypertensive crisis leading to shock, myocardial infarction, heart failure, and
several days later. This complication is related to the impact that alpha and beta-adrenoceptor antagonists have on blood vessels combined with the actions of catecholamines. The normal blood vessel is open, allowing for adequate blood flow. When catecholamines activate the alpha receptor, the vessel constricts (
protective vasodilation and worsens the patients hypertension. Controversy While the pre-operative alpha and beta blockade discussed above is overwhelmingly recognized as the standard of care, particularly in the United States, there has been discussion at the international level if a blockade is necessary. In 2017, a
, particularly in the United States, there has been discussion at the international level if a blockade is necessary. In 2017, a team of researchers from Germany published an observational case series that called into question the current recommendations for a blockade. The study examined the intraoperative maximal systolic
similar article with a warning against waiting an entire week to begin alpha-blockade. The French researchers called for immediate surgical intervention and consideration of steps to mitigate any intraoperative catecholamine crisis. These articles resulted in rebuttals from research teams in the United States, but an international consensus has
-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, California, nearly all indicated the importance of preoperative volume resuscitation (having the patient take in plenty of fluids prior to surgery). However, after reviewing their patient data, over 60% of the same physicians failed to discuss salt-
overload, and essential hypertension must also be considered. A perioperative hypertensive crisis is first treated with a 5.0 milligram (mg) intravenous bolus of phentolamine, with additional 5.0 mg dose every ten minutes until the blood pressure falls within an acceptable range. If the blood pressure is only
several reasons a patient may have low blood pressure in the post-operative period. First and foremost, the tumor (and its abundance of catecholamines causing high blood pressure) has been removed. Furthermore, the patient may still experience the effects of their alpha-adrenoceptor antagonist,
to surgery is so imperative. Vasopressors may be needed if the blood pressure does not respond to fluids.EndocrineHyperglycemia: Catecholamines prevent the secretion of insulin – a hormone responsible for lowering the body's blood glucose (sugar). Blood glucose levels should be checked frequently in the perioperative
needed if the blood pressure does not respond to fluids.EndocrineHyperglycemia: Catecholamines prevent the secretion of insulin – a hormone responsible for lowering the body's blood glucose (sugar). Blood glucose levels should be checked frequently in the perioperative period and insulin should be given as needed if levels
if the blood pressure does not respond to fluids.EndocrineHyperglycemia: Catecholamines prevent the secretion of insulin – a hormone responsible for lowering the body's blood glucose (sugar). Blood glucose levels should be checked frequently in the perioperative period and insulin should be given as needed if levels
Symptoms include tremor, anxiety, palpitations, sweating, altered mental status (confusion), dizziness, and blurred vision. A retrospective analysis of beta blocker found that some beta blocker use may cause people to more prone to hypoglycemia and not experience these symptoms, which could delay the
therapy as soon as the patient is able to take medication by mouthPatients should be transitioned to a normal maintenance (regular, daily) dose of steroids prior to discharge and referred to endocrinology for proper titration and management. Depending on the patient's total body surface area, the total
discharge and referred to endocrinology for proper titration and management. Depending on the patient's total body surface area, the total typical daily dose of hydrocortisone is between 15 and 25 mg daily (divided into morning and afternoon pills).Those who have lost both their adrenal glands will also require another
have lost both their adrenal glands will also require another steroid (mineralcorticoid replacement). The typical daily dose is between 50 and 200 micrograms of fludrocortisoneThere have been many other reported complications (renal failure, heart failure, intestinal pseudo-obstuction) following tumor resection. However, the
likely to be encountered, which is why their management has been specifically outlined here in this article.Metastatic pheochromocytoma is defined as the presence of tumor cells (chromaffin tissue) where they are not normally found. Patients with a paraganglioma are more likely to develop metastases than those with
normally found. Patients with a paraganglioma are more likely to develop metastases than those with a pheochromocytoma. The most common extra-adrenal sites of metastases are the lymph nodes, lung, liver, and bone. There have been several studied risk factors associated with the development of metastatic
been several studied risk factors associated with the development of metastatic disease - while the patients genetic background plays an important role, the initial age of presentation and size of the tumor lead to negative outcomes. Of all the genetic variants, succinate dehydrogenase subunit B (SDHB) mutations have
metachronous; those that are synchronous have developed within several months of the primary tumor, while metachronous metastases do not appear for a significant period of time.Laparascopic approach to the original disease, specially in big tumors, has been appointed as an important risk factor for tumoral seeding.
patients with minimal disease burden, a "watch and wait" approach with frequent imaging to monitor disease is favorable, withholding treatment until evidence of progression is visualized.Metastatic pheochromocytoma is best managed with a multidisciplinary team of oncologists, surgeons, radiologists, nuclear medicine physicians, and endocrinologists
frequent imaging to monitor disease is favorable, withholding treatment until evidence of progression is visualized.Metastatic pheochromocytoma is best managed with a multidisciplinary team of oncologists, surgeons, radiologists, nuclear medicine physicians, and endocrinologists. There are several treatment options available to patients depending on the amount and
, surgeons, radiologists, nuclear medicine physicians, and endocrinologists. There are several treatment options available to patients depending on the amount and location of disease:Surgery - Normally, the goal of surgery is complete cytoreductive surgery; leave no remnant of disease. However, with widespread metastatic
and endocrinologists. There are several treatment options available to patients depending on the amount and location of disease:Surgery - Normally, the goal of surgery is complete cytoreductive surgery; leave no remnant of disease. However, with widespread metastatic disease, this is not always feasible. Therefore
patients depending on the amount and location of disease:Surgery - Normally, the goal of surgery is complete cytoreductive surgery; leave no remnant of disease. However, with widespread metastatic disease, this is not always feasible. Therefore, a surgical debulking procedure is performed (removing as
surgical debulking procedure is performed (removing as much of the cancerous tissue as possible) in order to reduce patient symptoms by removing the source of catecholamines, improve response to chemo or radionuclide therapy, or simply decrease the size of the tumor. Unfortunately, the intended relief from the
-lived, especially if the patient has disease outside the abdomen. A 2013 study from the National Institutes of Health reported that a majority of patients suffered from recurrent biochemical evidence of disease within one year of the operation and less than 30% continued to be biochemically free of disease
has disease outside the abdomen. A 2013 study from the National Institutes of Health reported that a majority of patients suffered from recurrent biochemical evidence of disease within one year of the operation and less than 30% continued to be biochemically free of disease after five years.In contrast to
team from the Mayo Clinic retrospectively reviewed all of their patients who underwent external beam radiation therapy from 1973-2015 and reported that 94% of patients acknowledged symptomatic improvement and over 80% of patients showed no evidence of recurrent disease 5-years post-therapy. nother report from
their patients who underwent external beam radiation therapy from 1973-2015 and reported that 94% of patients acknowledged symptomatic improvement and over 80% of patients showed no evidence of recurrent disease 5-years post-therapy. nother report from the same institution looked at almost two decades of
of patients showed no evidence of recurrent disease 5-years post-therapy. nother report from the same institution looked at almost two decades of patients who underwent radiofrequency ablation, cryoablation, or percutaneous ethanol injection for metastatic pheochromocytoma and reported that local control was achieved in over 85%
, or percutaneous ethanol injection for metastatic pheochromocytoma and reported that local control was achieved in over 85% of targeted lesions and that 92% of procedures were associated with reduced pain and/or symptoms of catecholamine excess.Chemotherapy - The most common chemotherapy regimen for metastatic pheochromocytoma is cyclophosphamide, vincristine
reported that local control was achieved in over 85% of targeted lesions and that 92% of procedures were associated with reduced pain and/or symptoms of catecholamine excess.Chemotherapy - The most common chemotherapy regimen for metastatic pheochromocytoma is cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine, collectively known as CVD.
relief, reported by the patient. A systematic review and meta-analysis of unstratified pheochromocytoma patients who underwent CVD therapy showed that 37% of patients had a significant reduction in tumor volume, while 40% of patients experienced lower catecholamine burden. While there was no difference in overall
analysis of unstratified pheochromocytoma patients who underwent CVD therapy showed that 37% of patients had a significant reduction in tumor volume, while 40% of patients experienced lower catecholamine burden. While there was no difference in overall survival between patients whose tumors shrunk versus those without a response (no
have extended survival with CVD chemotherapy compared to their male counterparts. Genetic status has been shown to greatly impact response to CVD. A team of researchers from the National Institutes of Health reported that patient's with succinate dehydrogenase subunit B (SDHB) mutations are not only more likely to
dehydrogenase subunit B (SDHB) mutations are not only more likely to initially respond to CVD, but that they also experienced over 30 months of progression free survival (time until tumor returned) with continued administration.However, CVD is not the only proven chemotherapeutic regimen in the pheochromocytoma
metastatic or unresectable (not conducive to surgery) pheochromocytoma patients and the results were promising. Median overall survival was 36.7 months and 92% of patients had at least a partial positive response (tumor shrinkage) or stable disease without progression within the first year of the study. Furthermore
individualize patient treatment plans.According to the National Cancer Institute, prognosis is defined as the likely outcome of a disease OR, the chance of recovery or a recurrence. This is an extremely difficult question when it comes to pheochromcytoma, and the answer depends on the patients genetic status
survival improved if the patient had (1) disease of the head and neck compared to abdomen, (2) less than 40 years of age, (3) and if their biochemistry was less than five times the upper reference limit of normal.Recent literature has detailed several
and if their biochemistry was less than five times the upper reference limit of normal.Recent literature has detailed several factors that predict accelerated progression of disease and higher mortality rates, including patients who choose to forego surgical resection of their primary tumor, larger tumors at initial presentation, older
of their primary tumor, larger tumors at initial presentation, older age at initial diagnosis, and a shortened time from primary tumor to presence of metastases. The actual location of the metastases can also indicate prognosis, with osseous lesions (bone) faring better than their soft-tissue
) faring better than their soft-tissue (lung, liver) counterparts.According to the North American Neuroendocrine Tumor Society, the prevalence of pheochromocytoma is between 1:2500 and 1:6500, meaning that for every 2,500 – 6,500 people, there is (on average) one person with pheochromocytoma
(new cases per year) of 500 to 1600 cases. However, approximations in the early 2000's reported that upwards of 50% of pheochromocytoma diagnoses are at autopsy; therefore, the above estimations may be lower than expected. In a 50-year autopsy case series,
2011–2015, which was a significant increase from their 0.37 cases per 100,000 person-years reported from 1995–1999. Current hypotheses for why the incidence of pheochromocytoma is growing in the Dutch population point to the advent of modern imaging evaluation and the ability to detect these tumors prior to death.
above studies reported varying incidence and prevalence values, all have indicated that the average age at initial diagnosis is between the third to fifth decade of life. When younger patients are diagnosed with a pheochromocytoma, there should be a high suspicion for hereditary disease, as genetic anticipation (earlier
generation) is associated with some mutations.Classically, the pheochromocytoma "rules of 10" have been taught, particularly to medical students:10% of patients have malignant disease10% of patients have bilateral (both left and right adrenal glands) disease10% of patients have extra-adrenal (
mutations.Classically, the pheochromocytoma "rules of 10" have been taught, particularly to medical students:10% of patients have malignant disease10% of patients have bilateral (both left and right adrenal glands) disease10% of patients have extra-adrenal (paraganglioma) disease10% of patients
, particularly to medical students:10% of patients have malignant disease10% of patients have bilateral (both left and right adrenal glands) disease10% of patients have extra-adrenal (paraganglioma) disease10% of patients have inherited (familial disease)Despite the prominence in many respected textbooks, these guidelines
% of patients have bilateral (both left and right adrenal glands) disease10% of patients have extra-adrenal (paraganglioma) disease10% of patients have inherited (familial disease)Despite the prominence in many respected textbooks, these guidelines have since been established as inaccurate and are not used in
established as inaccurate and are not used in current epidemiological discussions.As suggested above, incidental imaging has become a major player in the diagnosis of patients with pheochromocytoma, with current estimates between 10–49% of all cases diagnosed after imaging was obtained for another reason. When an adrenal nodule
to the London Medical and Physical Journal describing the peculiar case of an 8-year old male patient who had suffered from seemingly random fits of pain concentrated in the abdomen accompanied by "a hectic flush distinctly marked on each cheek" with a "constant profuse and universal perspiration.
"a hectic flush distinctly marked on each cheek" with a "constant profuse and universal perspiration." Following his death, a group of physicians performed an autopsy to determine cause of death and discovered a six-inch oblong tumor composed of an unknown "yellow-ish coloured
cheek" with a "constant profuse and universal perspiration." Following his death, a group of physicians performed an autopsy to determine cause of death and discovered a six-inch oblong tumor composed of an unknown "yellow-ish coloured substance" coming from the capsula renalis (
, women with BRCA1/2 mutation have a 5% risk of developing primary peritoneal cancer even after prophylactic oophorectomy.Primary peritoneal carcinoma shows similar rates of tumor suppressor gene dysfunction (p53, BRCA, WT1) as ovarian cancer and can also show an increased expression of HER-2/neu.
high power field.Leiomyosarcomas are now staged using the 2009 FIGO staging system (previously they were staged like endometrial carcinomas)  at time of surgery.Stage I: tumor is limited to the uterusIA: ≤5 cm in greatest dimensionIB: >5 cmStage II: tumor extends beyond
uterusIA: ≤5 cm in greatest dimensionIB: >5 cmStage II: tumor extends beyond the uterus, but within the pelvisIIA: involves adnexa of uterusIIB: involves other pelvic tissuesStage III: tumor infiltrates abdominal tissuesIIIA: 1 siteIIIB: >1 siteIIIC: regional lymph node metastasisStage IVA:
to the uterusIA: limited to endometrium/endocervixIB: invades <½ myometriumIC: invades ≥½ myometriumFinally, malignant mixed Müllerian tumors, a type of carcinosarcoma, are staged similarly to endometrial carcinomas.Stage I: tumor is limited to the uterusIA: invades <½ myometriumIB: invades ≥½
metastases and/or inguinal lymph nodes)Therapy is based on staging and patient condition and utilizes one or more of the following approaches.Surgery is the mainstay of therapy if feasible involving total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Other approaches include radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and hormonal therapy.Prognosis
positive oropharyngeal cancer, which is caused by an oral human papillomavirus infection; and HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer, which is linked to use of alcohol, tobacco, or both.Oropharyngeal cancer is diagnosed by biopsy of observed abnormal tissue in the throat. OPC is staged according to
there are nearly 200 distinct human papillomaviruses (HPVs), and many HPV types are carcinogenic.Smoking and chewing tobacco (see Health effects of tobacco);Heavy alcohol use (see Long-term effects of alcohol consumption).A diet low in fruits and vegetables;Chewing paan (betel quid), a stimulant
, and many HPV types are carcinogenic.Smoking and chewing tobacco (see Health effects of tobacco);Heavy alcohol use (see Long-term effects of alcohol consumption).A diet low in fruits and vegetables;Chewing paan (betel quid), a stimulant commonly used in Southern and Southeast Asia;Marijuana smoking (see
consumption).A diet low in fruits and vegetables;Chewing paan (betel quid), a stimulant commonly used in Southern and Southeast Asia;Marijuana smoking (see Effects of cannabis);Asbestos exposure (see Asbestos-related diseases);Certain genetic changes including: P53 mutation and CDKN2A (p16) mutations;Poor nutrition;Plummer–Vinson syndrome. High
research conducted in 2017 demonstrated that HPV vaccination induces HPV antibodies levels at the oral cavity that correlate with circulating levels.Regarding the primary prevention of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer, safe oral sex habits should be advised (see Sex education). Regarding the primary prevention of HPV-
primary prevention of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer, safe oral sex habits should be advised (see Sex education). Regarding the primary prevention of HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer, educating people on the risks of chewing betel quid, alcohol use, and tobacco smoking is of the prime
fourth ventricle and tumors are usually present for 1 to 5 months before diagnosis is made. The child typically becomes listless, with repeated episodes of vomiting, and a morning headache, which may lead to a misdiagnosis of gastrointestinal disease or migraine. Soon after, the child will develop
late in the disease.Extraneural metastasis to the rest of the body is rare, and when it occurs, it is in the setting of relapse, more commonly in the era prior to routine chemotherapy.Medulloblastomas usually found in the vicinity of the fourth ventricle, between the brainstem
the brain, but they are not identical to medulloblastoma.Although medulloblastomas are thought to originate from immature or embryonal cells at their earliest stage of development, the cell of origin depends on the subgroup of medulloblastoma.  WNT tumors originate from the lower rhombic lip of the brainstem,
are not identical to medulloblastoma.Although medulloblastomas are thought to originate from immature or embryonal cells at their earliest stage of development, the cell of origin depends on the subgroup of medulloblastoma.  WNT tumors originate from the lower rhombic lip of the brainstem, while SHH tumors originate from
Although medulloblastomas are thought to originate from immature or embryonal cells at their earliest stage of development, the cell of origin depends on the subgroup of medulloblastoma.  WNT tumors originate from the lower rhombic lip of the brainstem, while SHH tumors originate from the external granular layer.Currently
variants seen on biopsy. Both perivascular pseudorosette and Homer Wright pseudorosette formations are highly characteristic of medulloblastomas, and are seen in up to half of cases. The classic rosette with tumor cells around a central lumen can be seen.In the past, medulloblastoma was classified using histology,
little cytoplasm, and a tendency to form clusters and rosettes.The Chang staging system can be used in making the diagnosis [1].Correct diagnosis of medulloblastoma may require ruling out atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor.		Treatment begins with maximal surgical removal of the tumor. The addition of radiation to
1].Correct diagnosis of medulloblastoma may require ruling out atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor.		Treatment begins with maximal surgical removal of the tumor. The addition of radiation to the entire neuraxis and chemotherapy may increase the disease-free survival. Some evidence indicates that proton beam irradiation reduces the impact of
of radiation to the entire neuraxis and chemotherapy may increase the disease-free survival. Some evidence indicates that proton beam irradiation reduces the impact of radiation on the cochlear and cardiovascular areas and reduces the cognitive late effects of cranial irradiation. This combination may permit a 5-year survival
cardiovascular areas and reduces the cognitive late effects of cranial irradiation. This combination may permit a 5-year survival in more than 80% of cases. The presence of desmoplastic features such as connective tissue formation offers a better prognosis. Prognosis is worse if the child is less than
desmoplastic features such as connective tissue formation offers a better prognosis. Prognosis is worse if the child is less than 3 years old, degree of resection is inadequate, or if any CSF, spinal, supratentorial, or systemic spread occurs. Dementia after radiotherapy and chemotherapy is a common
hearing loss, and endocrine disruption. Increased intracranial pressure may be controlled with corticosteroids or a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.Chemotherapy is often used as part of treatment. Evidence of benefit, however, is not clear as of 2013. A few different chemotherapeutic regimens for medulloblastoma are used; most
endocrine disruption. Increased intracranial pressure may be controlled with corticosteroids or a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.Chemotherapy is often used as part of treatment. Evidence of benefit, however, is not clear as of 2013. A few different chemotherapeutic regimens for medulloblastoma are used; most involve a combination of
of benefit, however, is not clear as of 2013. A few different chemotherapeutic regimens for medulloblastoma are used; most involve a combination of lomustine, cisplatin, carboplatin, vincristine, or cyclophosphamide. In younger patients (less than 3–4 years of age), chemotherapy can delay
used; most involve a combination of lomustine, cisplatin, carboplatin, vincristine, or cyclophosphamide. In younger patients (less than 3–4 years of age), chemotherapy can delay, or in some cases possibly even eliminate, the need for radiotherapy. However, both chemotherapy and radiotherapy
GLI2 amplification, or MYCN amplificationPoor prognosis: Group 3, MYC amplification, photoreceptor/GABAergic gene expressionIntermediate prognosis: Group 4, gene expression of neuronal/glutamatergic, CDK6 amplification, MYCN amplificationThe historical cumulative relative survival rate for all age groups and histology follow-up was 60%
risk profile. Depending on the randomization, half of the patients additionally received carboplatin daily during the radiation. The 5-year survival rate of patients with carboplatin was 82%, those without 68%. The European SIOP PNET 5 study is currently taking place and will run until
brain tumor in children, comprising 14.5% of newly diagnosed brain tumors. In adults, medulloblastoma is rare, comprising fewer than 2% of CNS malignancies.The rate of new cases of childhood medulloblastoma is higher in males (62%) than females (38%),
newly diagnosed brain tumors. In adults, medulloblastoma is rare, comprising fewer than 2% of CNS malignancies.The rate of new cases of childhood medulloblastoma is higher in males (62%) than females (38%), a feature which is not seen in adults.
which is not seen in adults.  Medulloblastoma and other PNET`s are more prevalent in younger children than older children.  About 40% of medulloblastoma patients are diagnosed before the age of five, 31% are between the ages of 5 and 9, 18.3% are between the
and 14, and 12.7% are between the ages of 15 and 19.Using gene transfer of SV40 large T-antigen in neuronal precursor cells of rats, a brain tumor model was established. The PNETs were histologically indistinguishable from the human counterparts and have been used to identify new genes
binding partners of SV40 Large T- antigen, other than p53.Recently, it has been generated a SHH-type mouse model with high-frequency of medulloblastoma, a Patched 1 heterozygous mice knockout for the medulloblastoma suppressor Tis21 (Patched1+-/Tis21 KO). The high medulloblastoma frequency appears to
to be caused by the down regulation of Cxcl3, being Cxcl3 induced by Tis21. Consistently, the treatment with Cxcl3 completely prevents the growth of medulloblastoma lesions in a Shh-type mouse model of medulloblastoma. Thus, CXCL3 is a target for medulloblastoma therapy.Brain and Spinal Tumors
being Cxcl3 induced by Tis21. Consistently, the treatment with Cxcl3 completely prevents the growth of medulloblastoma lesions in a Shh-type mouse model of medulloblastoma. Thus, CXCL3 is a target for medulloblastoma therapy.Brain and Spinal Tumors: Hope Through Research (National Institute of Neurological Disorders
biopsy done by an endoscope (a fiberoptic camera). Prevention includes stopping smoking and eating a healthy diet. Treatment is based on the cancer's stage and location, together with the person's general condition and individual preferences. Small localized squamous-cell cancers may be treated with surgery
done by an endoscope (a fiberoptic camera). Prevention includes stopping smoking and eating a healthy diet. Treatment is based on the cancer's stage and location, together with the person's general condition and individual preferences. Small localized squamous-cell cancers may be treated with surgery
has infiltrated over 60% of the circumference of the esophageal tube, by which time the tumor is already in an advanced stage. Onset of symptoms is usually caused by narrowing of the tube due to the physical presence of the tumor.The first and the most common symptom is
is less usual at first. Weight loss is often an initial symptom in cases of squamous-cell carcinoma, though not usually in cases of adenocarcinoma. Eventual weight loss due to reduced appetite and undernutrition is common. Pain behind the breastbone or in the region around the stomach  
.The presence of the tumor may disrupt the normal contractions of the esophagus when swallowing. This can lead to nausea and vomiting, regurgitation of food and coughing. There is also an increased risk of aspiration pneumonia due to food entering the airways through the abnormal connections (fistulas)
of the esophagus when swallowing. This can lead to nausea and vomiting, regurgitation of food and coughing. There is also an increased risk of aspiration pneumonia due to food entering the airways through the abnormal connections (fistulas) that may develop between the esophagus and the trachea (windpipe
. Early signs of this serious complication may be coughing on drinking or eating. The tumor surface may be fragile and bleed, causing vomiting of blood. Compression of local structures occurs in advanced disease, leading to such problems as upper airway obstruction and superior vena cava syndrome. Hypercalcemia
excess calcium in the blood) may occur.If the cancer has spread elsewhere, symptoms related to metastatic disease may appear. Common sites of spread include nearby lymph nodes, the liver, lungs and bone.  Liver metastasis can cause jaundice and abdominal swelling (ascites).
, and dyspnea (the feelings often associated with impaired breathing).The two main types (i.e. squamous-cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma) have distinct sets of risk factors. Squamous-cell carcinoma is linked to lifestyle factors such as smoking and alcohol. Adenocarcinoma has been linked to effects of long
of long-term acid reflux. Tobacco is a risk factor for both types. Both types are more common in people over 60 years of age.The two major risk factors for esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma are tobacco (smoking or chewing) and alcohol. The combination of
of age.The two major risk factors for esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma are tobacco (smoking or chewing) and alcohol. The combination of tobacco and alcohol has a strong synergistic effect. Some data suggest that about half of all cases are due to tobacco and about one-
due to tobacco and about one-third to alcohol, while over three-quarters of the cases in men are due to the combination of smoking and heavy drinking. Risks associated with alcohol appear to be linked to its aldehyde metabolite and to mutations in certain related enzymes. Such
effects of acid reflux (an extremely common condition, also known as gastroesophageal reflux disease or GERD) have been strongly linked to this type of cancer. Longstanding GERD can induce a change of cell type in the lower portion of the esophagus in response to erosion of its squamous lining
, also known as gastroesophageal reflux disease or GERD) have been strongly linked to this type of cancer. Longstanding GERD can induce a change of cell type in the lower portion of the esophagus in response to erosion of its squamous lining. This phenomenon, known as Barrett's esophagus
.Being obese or overweight both appear to be associated with increased risk. The association with obesity seems to be the strongest of any type of obesity-related cancer, though the reasons for this remain unclear. Abdominal obesity seems to be of particular relevance, given the closeness of
though the reasons for this remain unclear. Abdominal obesity seems to be of particular relevance, given the closeness of its association with this type of cancer, as well as with both GERD and Barrett's esophagus. This type of obesity is characteristic of men.  Physiologically, it
, given the closeness of its association with this type of cancer, as well as with both GERD and Barrett's esophagus. This type of obesity is characteristic of men.  Physiologically, it stimulates GERD and also has other chronic inflammatory effects.Helicobacter pylori infection (a common
it stimulates GERD and also has other chronic inflammatory effects.Helicobacter pylori infection (a common occurrence thought to have affected over half of the world's population) is not a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma and actually appears to be protective. Despite being a cause of GERD and a risk
stimulates GERD and also has other chronic inflammatory effects.Helicobacter pylori infection (a common occurrence thought to have affected over half of the world's population) is not a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma and actually appears to be protective. Despite being a cause of GERD and a risk
half of the world's population) is not a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma and actually appears to be protective. Despite being a cause of GERD and a risk factor for gastric cancer, the infection seems to be associated with a reduced risk of esophageal adenocarcinoma of as much as
esophageal adenocarcinoma of as much as 50%. The biological explanation for a protective effect is somewhat unclear. One explanation is that some strains of H. pylori reduce stomach acid, thereby reducing damage by GERD. Decreasing rates of H. pylori infection in Western populations over recent decades, which
effect is somewhat unclear. One explanation is that some strains of H. pylori reduce stomach acid, thereby reducing damage by GERD. Decreasing rates of H. pylori infection in Western populations over recent decades, which have been linked to less overcrowding in households, could be a factor in the
 Although studies of many reproductive factors have not produced a clear picture, risk seems to decline for the mother in line with prolonged periods of breastfeeding.Tobacco smoking increases risk, but the effect in esophageal adenocarcinoma is slight compared to that in squamous cell carcinoma, and alcohol has
in the region, including esophageal squamous-cell carcinomas, due to field cancerization (i.e. a regional reaction to long-term carcinogenic exposure).History of radiation therapy for other conditions in the chest is a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma.Corrosive injury to the esophagus by accidentally or intentionally swallowing
with time after diagnosis, probably due to the adoption of a gluten-free diet, which seems to have a protective role against development of malignancy in people with celiac disease. However, the delay in diagnosis and initiation of a gluten-free diet seems to increase the risk
malignancy in people with celiac disease. However, the delay in diagnosis and initiation of a gluten-free diet seems to increase the risk of malignancy. Moreover, in some cases the detection of celiac disease is due to the development of cancer, whose early symptoms are similar to
-free diet seems to increase the risk of malignancy. Moreover, in some cases the detection of celiac disease is due to the development of cancer, whose early symptoms are similar to some that may appear in celiac disease.Although an occlusive tumor may be suspected on a barium
camera down the esophagus and examining the wall, and is called an esophagogastroduodenoscopy. Biopsies taken of suspicious lesions are then examined histologically for signs of malignancy.Additional testing is needed to assess how much the cancer has spread (see § Staging, below). Computed tomography (CT
estimate the extent of the disease and is regarded as more precise than CT alone. Esophageal endoscopic ultrasound can provide staging information regarding the level of tumor invasion, and possible spread to regional lymph nodes.The location of the tumor is generally measured by the distance from the teeth.
alcohol consumption—and esophageal adenocarcinomas (EAC), which are often associated with a history of GERD and Barrett's esophagus. A rule of thumb is that a cancer in the upper two-thirds is likely to be ESCC and one in the lower one-third EAC.Rare histologic
as leiomyosarcoma, malignant melanoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and lymphoma, among others.Staging is based on the TNM staging system, which classifies the amount of tumor invasion (T), involvement of lymph nodes (N), and distant metastasis (M). The currently preferred classification is
lymphoma, among others.Staging is based on the TNM staging system, which classifies the amount of tumor invasion (T), involvement of lymph nodes (N), and distant metastasis (M). The currently preferred classification is the 2010 AJCC staging system for cancer of
help guide clinical decision making, this system also incorporates information on cell type (ESCC, EAC, etc.), grade (degree of differentiation – an indication of the biological aggressiveness of the cancer cells), and tumor location (upper, middle, lower, or junctional
a change in the cells lining the lower esophagus) are at much higher risk, and may receive regular endoscopic screening for the early signs of cancer. Because the benefit of screening for adenocarcinoma in people without symptoms is unclear, it is not recommended in the United States. Some
.  Adequate nutrition must be assured, and appropriate dental care is essential. Factors that influence treatment decisions include the stage and cellular type of cancer (EAC, ESCC, and other types), along with the person's general condition and any other diseases that are present.
lesions may entail removal of all or part of the esophagus (esophagectomy), although this is a difficult operation with a relatively high risk of mortality or post-operative difficulties. The benefits of surgery are less clear in early-stage ESCC than EAC. There are a number
esophagus (esophagectomy), although this is a difficult operation with a relatively high risk of mortality or post-operative difficulties. The benefits of surgery are less clear in early-stage ESCC than EAC. There are a number of surgical options, and the best choices for particular
in early-stage ESCC than EAC. There are a number of surgical options, and the best choices for particular situations remain the subject of research and discussion. As well as characteristics and location of the tumor, other factors include the patient's condition, and the type of
choices for particular situations remain the subject of research and discussion. As well as characteristics and location of the tumor, other factors include the patient's condition, and the type of operation the surgical team is most experienced with.The likely quality of life after treatment is a relevant factor
for particular situations remain the subject of research and discussion. As well as characteristics and location of the tumor, other factors include the patient's condition, and the type of operation the surgical team is most experienced with.The likely quality of life after treatment is a relevant factor
of research and discussion. As well as characteristics and location of the tumor, other factors include the patient's condition, and the type of operation the surgical team is most experienced with.The likely quality of life after treatment is a relevant factor when considering surgery.  Surgical
tumor, other factors include the patient's condition, and the type of operation the surgical team is most experienced with.The likely quality of life after treatment is a relevant factor when considering surgery.  Surgical outcomes are likely better in large centers where the procedures are frequently performed
Clear evidence from clinical trials for which approaches give the best outcomes in different circumstances is lacking.  A first decision, regarding the point of entry, is  between a transhiatial and a transthoracic procedure. The more recent transhiatial approach avoids the need to open the chest; instead
the remaining upper part of the esophagus at the neck.The traditional transthoracic approach enters the body through the chest, and has a number of variations. The thoracoabdominal approach opens the abdominal and thoracic cavities together, the two-stage Ivor Lewis (also called Lewis–Tanner)
or oxaliplatin) every three weeks with fluorouracil (5-FU) either continuously or every three weeks. In more recent studies, addition of epirubicin was better than other comparable regimens in advanced nonresectable cancer. Chemotherapy may be given after surgery (adjuvant, i.e. to reduce risk of
of epirubicin was better than other comparable regimens in advanced nonresectable cancer. Chemotherapy may be given after surgery (adjuvant, i.e. to reduce risk of recurrence), before surgery (neoadjuvant) or if surgery is not possible; in this case, cisplatin and 5-FU are used
neoadjuvant) or if surgery is not possible; in this case, cisplatin and 5-FU are used. Ongoing trials compare various combinations of chemotherapy; the phase II/III REAL-2 trial – for example – compares four regimens containing epirubicin and either cisplatin or oxaliplatin, and either
cancer cannot be removed by surgery. The relief of a blockage can help with pain and difficulty swallowing. Photodynamic therapy, a type of laser therapy, involves the use of drugs that are absorbed by cancer cells; when exposed to a special light, the drugs become active
. The relief of a blockage can help with pain and difficulty swallowing. Photodynamic therapy, a type of laser therapy, involves the use of drugs that are absorbed by cancer cells; when exposed to a special light, the drugs become active and destroy the cancer cells.		
overall five-year survival rate (5YSR) in the United States is around 15%, with most people dying within the first year of diagnosis. The latest survival data for England and Wales (patients diagnosed during 2007) show that only one in ten people survive esophageal cancer
5YSR. Esophageal cancer is the eighth most frequently diagnosed cancer worldwide, and because of its poor prognosis it is the sixth most common cause of cancer-related death. It caused about 400,000 deaths in 2012, accounting for about 5% of all cancer deaths (about 456,000 new
were the UK, Netherlands, Ireland, Iceland and New Zealand.In the United States, esophageal cancer is the seventh-leading cause of cancer death among males (making up 4% of the total). The National Cancer Institute estimated there were about 18,000 new cases and
Until the 1970s, squamous-cell carcinoma accounted for the vast majority of esophageal cancers in the United States. In recent decades, incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus (which is associated with Barrett's esophagus) steadily rose in the United States to the point that it has now
common cancer in the UK (around 8,300 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and it is the sixth most common cause of cancer death (around 7,700 people died in 2012).Humphrey Bogart, actor, died of esophageal cancer in 1957, aged 57.Christopher Hitchens, author and
-exams. However, the American Cancer Society suggests that some men should examine their testicles monthly, especially if they have a family history of cancer, and the American Urological Association recommends monthly testicular self-examinations for all young men.Symptoms may also include one or more of
cancer to spread to other organs, apart from the lungs. If it has, however, the following symptoms may be present:shortness of breath (dyspnea), cough or coughing up blood (hemoptysis) from metastatic spread to the lungsa lump in the neck due to metastases
, cryptorchidism, hypospadias, and poor semen quality make up the syndrome known as testicular dysgenesis syndrome.A major risk factor for the development of testis cancer is cryptorchidism (undescended testicles).  It is generally believed that the presence of a tumor contributes to cryptorchidism;  when
increased risk.  These may reflect endogenous or environmental hormones. Higher rates of testicular cancer in Western nations have been linked to the use of cannabis.Most testicular germ cell tumors have too many chromosomes, and most often they are triploid to tetraploid. An isochromosome 12p (the
Most testicular germ cell tumors have too many chromosomes, and most often they are triploid to tetraploid. An isochromosome 12p (the short arm of chromosome 12 on both sides of the same centromere) is present in about 80% of the testicular cancers, and also the other cancers
of the disease is evaluated by CT scans, which are used to locate metastases.The differential diagnosis of testicular cancer requires examining the histology of tissue obtained from an inguinal orchiectomy - that is, surgical excision of the entire testis along with attached structures (epididymis and spermatic cord)
performed, as it raises the risk of spreading cancer cells into the scrotum.Inguinal orchiectomy is the preferred method because it lowers the risk of cancer cells escaping. This is because the lymphatic system of the scrotum, through which white blood cells (and, potentially, cancer cells
high levels of chorionic gonadotropin; however, the first sign of testicular cancer is usually a painless lump. Note that only about 25% of seminomas have elevated chorionic gonadotropin, so a pregnancy test is not very sensitive for making out testicular cancer.The American Academy of Family Physicians
cell tumorMesenchymal tumors of the spermatic cord and testicular adnexaeLipomaLiposarcomaRhabdomyosarcomaAggressive angiomyxomaAngiomyofibroblastoma-like tumor (see Myxoma)FibromatosisFibromaSolitary fibrous tumorOthersSecondary tumors of the testisThe three basic types of treatment are surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy.Surgery is performed by urologists; radiation therapy is administered by radiation oncologists; and chemotherapy
the belt line in the inguinal area.)  In the UK, the procedure is known as a radical orchidectomy.In the case of nonseminomas that appear to be stage I, surgery may be done on the retroperitoneal/paraaortic lymph nodes (in a separate operation) to
, this approach, while standard in many places, especially the United States, is out of favor due to costs and the high level of expertise required to perform successful surgery. Sperm banking is frequently carried out prior to the procedure (as with chemotherapy), as there is
no further surgery is performed unless tests indicate that the cancer has returned. This approach maintains a high cure rate because of the growing accuracy of surveillance techniques.Since testicular cancers can spread, patients are usually offered adjuvant treatment - in the form of chemotherapy or radiotherapy - to kill
rate because of the growing accuracy of surveillance techniques.Since testicular cancers can spread, patients are usually offered adjuvant treatment - in the form of chemotherapy or radiotherapy - to kill any cancerous cells that may exist outside of the affected testicle. The type of adjuvant therapy depends largely on
adjuvant therapy depends largely on the histology of the tumor (i.e. the size and shape of its cells under the microscope) and the stage of progression at the time of surgery (i.e. how far cells have 'escaped' from the testicle, invaded the surrounding tissue, or spread
the histology of the tumor (i.e. the size and shape of its cells under the microscope) and the stage of progression at the time of surgery (i.e. how far cells have 'escaped' from the testicle, invaded the surrounding tissue, or spread to the rest of the
to cure rates of over 95%.Radiation may be used to treat stage II seminoma cancers, or as adjuvant (preventative) therapy in the case of stage I seminomas, to minimize the likelihood that tiny, non-detectable tumors exist and will spread (in the inguinal and para-
masses left behind (stage 2B or more advanced), particularly in the cases of large nonseminomas. Seminoma As an adjuvant treatment, use of chemotherapy as an alternative to radiation therapy in the treatment of seminoma is increasing, because radiation therapy appears to have more significant long-term
particularly in the cases of large nonseminomas. Seminoma As an adjuvant treatment, use of chemotherapy as an alternative to radiation therapy in the treatment of seminoma is increasing, because radiation therapy appears to have more significant long-term side effects (for example, internal scarring, increased risks
(for example, internal scarring, increased risks of secondary malignancies, etc.).  Two doses, or occasionally a single dose of carboplatin, typically delivered three weeks apart, is proving to be a successful adjuvant treatment, with recurrence rates in the same ranges as those
weeks apart, is proving to be a successful adjuvant treatment, with recurrence rates in the same ranges as those of radiotherapy. The concept of carboplatin as a single-dose therapy was developed by Tim Oliver, Professor of Medical Oncology at Barts and The London School of Medicine and
treatment.Treatment of testicular cancer is one of the success stories of modern medicine, with sustained response to treatment in more than 90% of cases, regardless of stage. In 2011 overall cure rates of more than 95% were reported, and 80% for metastatic disease—
to the chemotherapy drug cisplatin. In the United States, when the disease is treated while it is still localized, more than 99% of people survive 5 years.For many patients with stage I cancer, adjuvant (preventative) therapy following surgery may not be appropriate and patients
) therapy following surgery may not be appropriate and patients will undergo surveillance instead. The form this surveillance takes, e.g. the type and frequency of investigations and the length time it should continue, will depend on the type of cancer (non-seminoma or seminoma), but the
The form this surveillance takes, e.g. the type and frequency of investigations and the length time it should continue, will depend on the type of cancer (non-seminoma or seminoma), but the aim is to avoid unnecessary treatments in the many patients who are cured by their
are detected early and cured. This approach ensures that chemotherapy and or radiotherapy is only given to the patients that need it. The number of patients ultimately cured is the same using surveillance as post-operative “adjuvant” treatments, but the patients have to be prepared to follow
is the same using surveillance as post-operative “adjuvant” treatments, but the patients have to be prepared to follow a prolonged series of visits and tests.For both non-seminomas and seminomas, surveillance tests generally include physical examination, blood tests for tumor markers, chest
for tumor markers, chest x-rays and CT scanning.  However, the requirements of a surveillance program differ according to the type of disease since, for seminoma patients, relapses can occur later and blood tests are not as good at indicating relapse.CT scans are performed
increasingly preferred for the lungs as they give sufficient detail combined with a lower false-positive rate and significantly smaller radiation dose than CT.The frequency of CT scans during surveillance should ensure that relapses are detected at an early stage while minimizing the radiation exposure.For patients treated for stage I
patients treated for stage I seminoma who choose surveillance rather than undergoing adjuvant therapy, there have been no randomized trials to determine the optimum frequency of scans and visits, and the schedules vary very widely across the world, and within individual countries. In the UK there is an ongoing
be preferable to CT.For more advanced stages of testicular cancer, and for those cases in which radiation therapy or chemotherapy was administered, the extent of monitoring (tests) after treatment will vary on the basis of the circumstances, but normally should be done for five years in uncomplicated cases
on the basis of the circumstances, but normally should be done for five years in uncomplicated cases and for longer in those with higher risks of relapse.A man with one remaining testis may maintain fertile.  However, sperm banking may be appropriate for men who still plan to
the U.S. and Europe, and is uncommon in Asia and Africa.  Worldwide incidence has doubled since the 1960s, with the highest rates of prevalence in Scandinavia, Germany, and New Zealand.Although testicular cancer is most common among men aged 15–40 years, it has three peaks
roughly 1 in 200 (0.5%). It is the 16th most common cancer in men. It accounts for less than 1% of cancer deaths in men (around 60 men died in 2012).Testicular tumors occur also in animals.  In horses, these include interstitial cell tumors
cell tumors and teratomas.  Typically, the former are found in older stallions (affected stallions may become extremely vicious, suggesting excessive production of androgen), and the latter are found in young horses and are large.Ball Checker, self-exam app from the Testicular Cancer
breast cancer and facilitates treatment and analysis. Stage I Stage I is an invasive breast cancer with the tumor not exceeding 2 cm and absence of lymph node involvement. Stage II Stage II includes stages IIA and IIB. Stage IIA One of the following three items applies:T0 or
:It has spread to 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes (N1a), but not to distant sites (M0), orTiny amounts of cancer are found in internal mammary lymph nodes on sentinel lymph node biopsy (N1b), but not in distant sites (M0),
N1b), but not in distant sites (M0), orIt has spread to 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes, and tiny amounts of cancer are found in internal mammary lymph nodes on sentinel lymph node biopsy (N1c), but not to distant sites (M0),
than 2 cm and less than 5 cm across (T2). It has spread to 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes and/or tiny amounts of cancer are found in internal mammary lymph nodes on sentinel lymph node biopsy (N1). It has not spread to distant sites (M0
psychological responses, and experiences in health care. Lesions are easier to find in males due to the smaller breast size; however, lack of awareness may postpone the seeking of medical attention. The presence of gynecomastia may mask the condition. The diagnosis is made later in males—
to find in males due to the smaller breast size; however, lack of awareness may postpone the seeking of medical attention. The presence of gynecomastia may mask the condition. The diagnosis is made later in males—at age 67 on average—than in females with their average
, namely both chemotherapy plus tamoxifen and other hormonal therapy. There are no controlled studies in males comparing adjuvant options. In the vast majority of males with breast cancer hormone receptor studies are positive, and those situations are typically treated with hormonal therapy.Locally recurrent disease is treated with
tumor size and absence or paucity of local lymph node involvement. Hormonal treatment may be associated with hot flashes and impotence.About one percent of breast cancer develops in males. It is estimated that about 2,140 new cases are diagnosed annually in the United States (US) and about
breast cancer. Incidence of male breast cancer has been increasing which raises the probability of other family members developing the disease. The relative risk of breast cancer for a female with an affected brother is approximately 30% higher than for a female with an affected sister.  The tumor
to the development of abnormal cells that have the ability to invade or spread to other parts of the body. There are three main types of skin cancers: basal-cell skin cancer (BCC), squamous-cell skin cancer (SCC) and melanoma. The first two
damage the tissue around it but is unlikely to spread to distant areas or result in death. It often appears as a painless raised area of skin that may be shiny with small blood vessels running over it or may present as a raised area with an ulcer. Squamous-cell
in size, shape, color, has irregular edges, has more than one color, is itchy or bleeds.More than 90% of cases are caused by exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. This exposure increases the risk of all three main types of skin cancer.
than 90% of cases are caused by exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. This exposure increases the risk of all three main types of skin cancer. Exposure has increased, partly due to a thinner ozone layer. Tanning beds are another common source of ultraviolet radiation. For
all three main types of skin cancer. Exposure has increased, partly due to a thinner ozone layer. Tanning beds are another common source of ultraviolet radiation. For melanomas and basal-cell cancers, exposure during childhood is particularly harmful. For squamous-cell skin cancers, total
For squamous-cell skin cancers, total exposure, irrespective of when it occurs, is more important. Between 20% and 30% of melanomas develop from moles. People with lighter skin are at higher risk as are those with poor immune function such as from medications or HIV
with poor immune function such as from medications or HIV/AIDS. Diagnosis is by biopsy.Decreasing exposure to ultraviolet radiation and the use of sunscreen appear to be effective methods of preventing melanoma and squamous-cell skin cancer. It is not clear if sunscreen affects the risk of
medications such as fluorouracil. Immunotherapy might be the only hope for individuals with multiple malignancies such as Xeroderma Pigmentosum and Gorlin syndrome.  Treatment of melanoma may involve some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and targeted therapy. In those people whose disease has spread to other areas
might be the only hope for individuals with multiple malignancies such as Xeroderma Pigmentosum and Gorlin syndrome.  Treatment of melanoma may involve some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and targeted therapy. In those people whose disease has spread to other areas of the body, palliative care
and targeted therapy. In those people whose disease has spread to other areas of the body, palliative care may be used to improve quality of life. Melanoma has one of the higher survival rates among cancers, with over 86% of people in the UK and more than 90
palliative care may be used to improve quality of life. Melanoma has one of the higher survival rates among cancers, with over 86% of people in the UK and more than 90% in the United States surviving more than 5 years.Skin cancer is the most common form
people in the UK and more than 90% in the United States surviving more than 5 years.Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer, globally accounting for at least 40% of cancer cases. The most common type is nonmelanoma skin cancer, which occurs in at
the United States surviving more than 5 years.Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer, globally accounting for at least 40% of cancer cases. The most common type is nonmelanoma skin cancer, which occurs in at least 2–3 million people per year. This is a
, melanoma occurred in 232,000 people and resulted in 55,000 deaths. White people in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa have the highest rates of melanoma in the world. The three main types of skin cancer have become more common in the last 20 to 40 years, especially in
deaths. White people in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa have the highest rates of melanoma in the world. The three main types of skin cancer have become more common in the last 20 to 40 years, especially in those areas with mostly White people.There are three
have become more common in the last 20 to 40 years, especially in those areas with mostly White people.There are three main types of skin cancer: basal-cell skin cancer (basal-cell carcinoma) (BCC), squamous-cell skin cancer (squamous-
Crusting and bleeding in the center of the tumor frequently develops. It is often mistaken for a sore that does not heal. This form of skin cancer is the least deadly, and with proper treatment can be completely eliminated, often without significant scarring.Squamous-cell skin cancer
most common skin cancer. It is dangerous, but not nearly as dangerous as a melanoma.Most melanoma consist of various colours from shades of brown to black. A small number of melanoma are pink, red or fleshy in colour; these are called amelanotic melanoma and tend to
, but not nearly as dangerous as a melanoma.Most melanoma consist of various colours from shades of brown to black. A small number of melanoma are pink, red or fleshy in colour; these are called amelanotic melanoma and tend to be more aggressive. Warning signs of malignant
tender red, purple or skin colored bumps that are not painful or itchy.  They may be mistaken for a cyst or another type of cancer.Ultraviolet radiation from sun exposure is the primary environmental cause of skin cancer. This can occur in professions such as farming. Other
itchy.  They may be mistaken for a cyst or another type of cancer.Ultraviolet radiation from sun exposure is the primary environmental cause of skin cancer. This can occur in professions such as farming. Other risk factors that play a role include:Light skin color Age Smoking
tobaccoHPV infections increase the risk of squamous-cell skin cancer.Some genetic syndromes including congenital melanocytic nevi syndrome which is characterized by the presence of nevi (birthmarks or moles) of varying size which are either present at birth, or appear within 6 months of birth. Nevi larger
characterized by the presence of nevi (birthmarks or moles) of varying size which are either present at birth, or appear within 6 months of birth. Nevi larger than 20 mm (3/4") in size are at higher risk for becoming cancerous.Chronic non-healing wounds
X-rays, environmental carcinogens, and artificial UV radiation (e.g. tanning beds). It is believed that tanning beds are the cause of hundreds of thousands of basal and squamous-cell skin cancer. The World Health Organization now places people who use artificial tanning beds in its
rays, environmental carcinogens, and artificial UV radiation (e.g. tanning beds). It is believed that tanning beds are the cause of hundreds of thousands of basal and squamous-cell skin cancer. The World Health Organization now places people who use artificial tanning beds in its highest risk
now places people who use artificial tanning beds in its highest risk category for skin cancer. Alcohol consumption, specifically excessive drinking increase the risk of sunburns.The use of many immunosuppressive medications increases the risk of skin cancer. Cyclosporin A, a calcineurin inhibitor for example increases the risk
category for skin cancer. Alcohol consumption, specifically excessive drinking increase the risk of sunburns.The use of many immunosuppressive medications increases the risk of skin cancer. Cyclosporin A, a calcineurin inhibitor for example increases the risk approximately 200 times, and azathioprine about 60 times.Deliberate exposure
assisted diagnosis devices have been developed that analyze images from a dermatoscope or spectroscopy and can be used by a diagnostician to aid in the detection of skin cancer. CAD systems have been found to be highly sensitive in the detection of melanoma, but have a high false-positive rate
be used by a diagnostician to aid in the detection of skin cancer. CAD systems have been found to be highly sensitive in the detection of melanoma, but have a high false-positive rate. There is not yet enough evidence to recommend CAD as compared to traditional diagnostic methods
enough evidence to recommend CAD as compared to traditional diagnostic methods.High-frequency ultrasound (HFUS) is of unclear usefulness in the diagnosis of skin cancer. There is insufficient evidence for reflectance confocal microscopy to diagnose basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma or any other skin cancers.Sunscreen
and squamous-cell carcinoma. There is little evidence that it is effective in preventing basal-cell carcinoma. Other advice to reduce rates of skin cancer includes avoiding sunburning, wearing protective clothing, sunglasses and hats, and attempting to avoid sun exposure or periods of peak exposure.
to reduce rates of skin cancer includes avoiding sunburning, wearing protective clothing, sunglasses and hats, and attempting to avoid sun exposure or periods of peak exposure. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that people between 9 and 25 years of age be advised to avoid ultraviolet light.
and attempting to avoid sun exposure or periods of peak exposure. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that people between 9 and 25 years of age be advised to avoid ultraviolet light.The risk of developing skin cancer can be reduced through a number of measures including decreasing indoor tanning
between 9 and 25 years of age be advised to avoid ultraviolet light.The risk of developing skin cancer can be reduced through a number of measures including decreasing indoor tanning and mid day sun exposure, increasing the use of sunscreen, and avoiding the use of tobacco products.There
risk of developing skin cancer can be reduced through a number of measures including decreasing indoor tanning and mid day sun exposure, increasing the use of sunscreen, and avoiding the use of tobacco products.There is insufficient evidence either for or against screening for skin cancers. Vitamin supplements and
reduced through a number of measures including decreasing indoor tanning and mid day sun exposure, increasing the use of sunscreen, and avoiding the use of tobacco products.There is insufficient evidence either for or against screening for skin cancers. Vitamin supplements and antioxidant supplements have not been found to
and titanium oxide are often used in sun screen to provide broad protection from UVA and UVB ranges.Eating certain foods may decrease the risk of sunburns but this is much less than the protection provided by sunscreen.A meta-analysis of skin cancer prevention in high risk individuals found
.Eating certain foods may decrease the risk of sunburns but this is much less than the protection provided by sunscreen.A meta-analysis of skin cancer prevention in high risk individuals found evidence that topical application of T4N5 liposome lotion reduced the rate of appearance of basal cell carcinomas in
sunscreen.A meta-analysis of skin cancer prevention in high risk individuals found evidence that topical application of T4N5 liposome lotion reduced the rate of appearance of basal cell carcinomas in people with xeroderma pigmentosum, and that acitretin taken by mouth may have a skin protective benefit in people following
, and that acitretin taken by mouth may have a skin protective benefit in people following kidney transplant.Treatment is dependent on the specific type of cancer, location of the cancer, age of the person, and whether the cancer is primary or a recurrence. For a small basal
cancer off) can provide adequate control of the disease; all of them, however, may have lower overall cure rates than certain type of surgery. Other modalities of treatment such as photodynamic therapy, epidermal radioisotope therapy, topical chemotherapy, electrodesiccation and curettage can be found in the
adequate control of the disease; all of them, however, may have lower overall cure rates than certain type of surgery. Other modalities of treatment such as photodynamic therapy, epidermal radioisotope therapy, topical chemotherapy, electrodesiccation and curettage can be found in the discussions of basal-cell
amount of surrounding tissue and the edges are checked immediately to see if tumor is found. This provides the opportunity to remove the least amount of tissue and provide the best cosmetically favorable results. This is especially important for areas where excess skin is limited, such as the face.
perform this technique.  An alternative method is CCPDMA and can be performed by a pathologist not familiar with Mohs surgery.In the case of disease that has spread (metastasized), further surgical procedures or chemotherapy may be required.Treatments for metastatic melanoma include biologic immunotherapy agents ipilimumab
nivolumab; BRAF inhibitors, such as vemurafenib and dabrafenib; and a MEK inhibitor trametinib.Currently, surgical excision is the most common form of treatment for skin cancers. The goal of reconstructive surgery is restoration of normal appearance and function. The choice of technique in reconstruction is dictated
is the most common form of treatment for skin cancers. The goal of reconstructive surgery is restoration of normal appearance and function. The choice of technique in reconstruction is dictated by the size and location of the defect. Excision and reconstruction of facial skin cancers is generally more challenging due
dressing is placed atop the graft for seven to ten days, to immobilize the graft as it heals in place. There are two forms of skin grafting: split thickness and full thickness. In a split thickness skin graft, a shaver is used to shave a layer of skin
forms of skin grafting: split thickness and full thickness. In a split thickness skin graft, a shaver is used to shave a layer of skin from the abdomen or thigh. The donor site regenerates skin and heals over a period of two weeks. In a full thickness skin
or thigh. The donor site regenerates skin and heals over a period of two weeks. In a full thickness skin graft, a segment of skin is totally removed and the donor site needs to be sutured closed.Split thickness grafts can be used to repair larger defects, but
. An example of such reconstruction is a pedicled forehead flap for repair of a large nasal skin defect. Once the flap develops a source of blood supply form its new bed, the vascular pedicle can be detached.The mortality rate of basal-cell and squamous-cell carcinoma
cell and squamous-cell carcinoma is around 0.3%, causing 2000 deaths per year in the US. In comparison, the mortality rate of melanoma is 15–20% and it causes 6500 deaths per year. Even though it is much less common, malignant melanoma is responsible for 75
rate with Mohs' micrographic surgery was around 95 percent for recurrent basal cell carcinoma.Australia and New Zealand exhibit one of the highest rates of skin cancer incidence in the world, almost four times the rates registered in the United States, the UK and Canada. Around 434,000 people
Canada. Around 434,000 people receive treatment for non-melanoma skin cancers and 10,300 are treated for melanoma. Melanoma is the most common type of cancer in people between 15–44 years in both countries. The incidence of skin cancer has been increasing. The incidence of melanoma among Auckland residents
and 10,300 are treated for melanoma. Melanoma is the most common type of cancer in people between 15–44 years in both countries. The incidence of skin cancer has been increasing. The incidence of melanoma among Auckland residents of European descent in 1995 was 77.7 cases per 100,000 people per year
the most common type of cancer in people between 15–44 years in both countries. The incidence of skin cancer has been increasing. The incidence of melanoma among Auckland residents of European descent in 1995 was 77.7 cases per 100,000 people per year, and was predicted to increase in the 21st
to melanoma and 31,000 of which are due to non-melanoma skin cancers. This is up from 51,000 in 1990.More than 3.5 million cases of skin cancer are diagnosed annually in the United States, which makes it the most common form of cancer in that country. One in five
from 51,000 in 1990.More than 3.5 million cases of skin cancer are diagnosed annually in the United States, which makes it the most common form of cancer in that country. One in five Americans will develop skin cancer at some point of their lives. The most common form of skin
form of cancer in that country. One in five Americans will develop skin cancer at some point of their lives. The most common form of skin cancer is basal-cell carcinoma, followed by squamous cell carcinoma. Unlike for other cancers, there exists no basal and squamous cell
the US in 2008, 59,695 people were diagnosed with melanoma, and 8,623 people died from it. In Australia more than 12,500 new cases of melanoma are reported each year, out of which more than 1,500 die from the disease. Australia has the highest per capita incidence of melanoma
cases of melanoma are reported each year, out of which more than 1,500 die from the disease. Australia has the highest per capita incidence of melanoma in the world.Although the rates of many cancers in the United States is falling, the incidence of melanoma keeps growing, with
the highest per capita incidence of melanoma in the world.Although the rates of many cancers in the United States is falling, the incidence of melanoma keeps growing, with approximately 68,729 melanomas diagnosed in 2004 according to reports of the National Cancer Institute.Melanoma is the fifth most common
the United States, an arbitrarily adopted standard of the ages used are 0–14 years inclusive, that is, up to 14 years 11.9 months of age. However, the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with
standard of the ages used are 0–14 years inclusive, that is, up to 14 years 11.9 months of age. However, the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in
years 11.9 months of age. However, the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in children.Worldwide, it is estimated that childhood cancer has an incidence of more than
the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in children.Worldwide, it is estimated that childhood cancer has an incidence of more than 175,000 per year, and a mortality rate
year, and a mortality rate of approximately 96,000 per year.  In developed countries, childhood cancer has a mortality of approximately 20% of cases. In low resource settings, on the other hand, mortality is approximately 80%, or even 90% in the world's
%, or even 90% in the world's poorest countries.  In many developed countries the incidence is slowly increasing, as rates of childhood cancer increased by 0.6% per year between 1975 and 2002 in the United States and by 1.1% per year between 1978 and 1997
the United States and by 1.1% per year between 1978 and 1997 in Europe. Unlike cancers in adults, which typically arise from years of DNA damage, childhood cancers are caused by a misappropriation of normal developmental processes.Children with cancer are at risk for developing various cognitive or
may be related to brain injury stemming from the cancer itself, such as a brain tumor or central nervous system metastasis or from side effects of cancer treatments such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy.  Studies have shown that chemo and radiation therapies may damage brain white matter and disrupt brain
special educational services at school if their cognitive learning disability affects their educational success.Familial and genetic factors are identified in 5-15% of childhood cancer cases. In <5-10% of cases, there are known environmental exposures and exogenous factors, such as prenatal exposure
their educational success.Familial and genetic factors are identified in 5-15% of childhood cancer cases. In <5-10% of cases, there are known environmental exposures and exogenous factors, such as prenatal exposure to tobacco, X-rays, or certain medications.
and exogenous factors, such as prenatal exposure to tobacco, X-rays, or certain medications. For the remaining 75-90% of cases, however, the individual causes remain unknown. In most cases, as in carcinogenesis in general, the cancers are assumed to involve
cases, as in carcinogenesis in general, the cancers are assumed to involve multiple risk factors and variables.Aspects that make the risk factors of childhood cancer different from those seen in adult cancers include:Different, and sometimes unique, exposures to environmental hazards. Children must often rely
Children must often rely on adults to protect them from toxic environmental agents.Immature physiological systems to clear or metabolize environmental substancesThe growth and development of children in phases known as "developmental windows" result in certain "critical windows of vulnerability".Also, a longer life expectancy in children
systems to clear or metabolize environmental substancesThe growth and development of children in phases known as "developmental windows" result in certain "critical windows of vulnerability".Also, a longer life expectancy in children avails for a longer time to manifest cancer processes with long latency periods, increasing the
with long latency periods, increasing the risk of developing some cancer types later in life.Advanced parental age has been associated with increased risk of childhood cancer in the offspring. There are preventable causes of childhood malignancy, such as delivery overuse and misuse of ionizing radiation through computed tomography
cancer types later in life.Advanced parental age has been associated with increased risk of childhood cancer in the offspring. There are preventable causes of childhood malignancy, such as delivery overuse and misuse of ionizing radiation through computed tomography scans when the test is not indicated or when adult protocols
brain tumors (18%), and lymphomas (11%). In 2005, 4.1 of every 100,000 young people under 20 years of age in the U.S. were diagnosed with leukemia, and 0.8 per 100,000 died from it. The number of new cases was highest among the
leukemia, and 0.8 per 100,000 died from it. The number of new cases was highest among the 1–4 age group, but the number of deaths was highest among the 10–14 age group.In 2005, 2.9 of every 100,000 people 0–19 years of age were found to have cancer
age group, but the number of deaths was highest among the 10–14 age group.In 2005, 2.9 of every 100,000 people 0–19 years of age were found to have cancer of the brain or central nervous system, and 0.7 per 100,000 died from it. These cancers were found
or central nervous system, and 0.7 per 100,000 died from it. These cancers were found most often in children between 1 and 4 years of age, but the most deaths occurred among those aged 5–9. The main subtypes of brain and central nervous system tumors in children are:
found most often in children between 1 and 4 years of age, but the most deaths occurred among those aged 5–9. The main subtypes of brain and central nervous system tumors in children are: astrocytoma, brain stem glioma, craniopharyngioma, desmoplastic infantile ganglioglioma, ependymoma, high-
%, many sites)Pleuropulmonary blastoma (lung or pleural cavity)Hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer)Adolescent and young adult oncology (AYA) is a branch of medicine that deals with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer in AYA patients aged 13–30. Studies have continuously shown that while pediatric
carcinoma (liver cancer)Adolescent and young adult oncology (AYA) is a branch of medicine that deals with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer in AYA patients aged 13–30. Studies have continuously shown that while pediatric cancer survival rates have gone up, the survival rate for adolescents
serve patients up to age 21. Additionally, AYAs face problems that adults and children rarely see including college concerns, fertility, and sense of aloneness. Studies have often shown that treating young adults with the same protocols used in pediatrics is more effective than adult oriented treatments.Childhood
Childhood cancers do not typically consist of tumors with clinically targetable oncogenes. Thus, treatment is frequently limited to chemoradiotherapy, which is a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The cytotoxicity of chemotherapy can result in immediate and long-term treatment-related comorbidities. For children undergoing treatment for
tumors with clinically targetable oncogenes. Thus, treatment is frequently limited to chemoradiotherapy, which is a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The cytotoxicity of chemotherapy can result in immediate and long-term treatment-related comorbidities. For children undergoing treatment for high-risk cancer, more than
for high-risk cancer, more than 80% experience life-threatening or fatal toxicity as a result of their treatment.Adult survivors of childhood cancer have some physical, psychological, and social difficulties.Premature heart disease is a major long-term complication in adult survivors of
of childhood cancer have some physical, psychological, and social difficulties.Premature heart disease is a major long-term complication in adult survivors of childhood cancer. Adult survivors are eight times more likely to die of heart disease than other people, and more than half of children treated
adult survivors of childhood cancer. Adult survivors are eight times more likely to die of heart disease than other people, and more than half of children treated for cancer develop some type of cardiac abnormality, although this may be asymptomatic or too mild to qualify for a clinical diagnosis of
of children treated for cancer develop some type of cardiac abnormality, although this may be asymptomatic or too mild to qualify for a clinical diagnosis of heart disease.Childhood cancer survivors are also at risk of developing adverse effects on the kidneys  and the liver. The risk of liver
diagnosis of heart disease.Childhood cancer survivors are also at risk of developing adverse effects on the kidneys  and the liver. The risk of liver late adverse effects in childhood cancer survivors is increased in those who have had radiotherapy to the liver and in people with factors such as
that sickens 6 to 7 children out of every 100,000 annually in parts of sub-Saharan Africa, where it is associated with a history of infection by both Epstein-Barr virus and malaria. In industrialized countries, Burkitt lymphoma is not associated with these infectious conditions.In the
In industrialized countries, Burkitt lymphoma is not associated with these infectious conditions.In the United States, cancer is the second most common cause of death among children between the ages of 1 and 14 years, exceeded only by accidents. More than 16 out of every 100,000 children and
, it was estimated that there was an incidence of 12,000 new cases, and 1,300 deaths, from cancer among children 0 to 14 years of age. Statistics from the 2014 American Cancer Society report:Ages birth to 14Ages 15 to 19Note: Incidence and mortality rates are per 1,000,000
Foundation focuses on finding less toxic and more effective treatments for pediatric cancers. This foundation works with 24 different hospitals across the US in search of treatments effective in practice. Childhood Cancer International is the largest global pediatric cancer foundation. It focuses on early access to care for childhood cancers
2010. Ways in which the foundations are helped by people include writing checks, collecting spare coins, bake/lemonade sales, donating portions of purchases from stores or restaurants, or Paid Time Off donations as well as auctions, bike rides, dance-a-thons. Additionally
such as the head, neck or extremities. Five key attributes of MCC were summarized in 2008 in the acronym AEIOU (Asymptomatic/lack of tenderness, Expanding rapidly, Immune suppression, Older than 50 years, and Ultraviolet-exposed site on a person with fair skin).
with fair skin). Ninety percent of MCC's have 3 or more of those features.MCC is sometimes mistaken for other histological types of cancer, including basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, malignant melanoma, lymphoma, and small cell carcinoma, or as a benign cyst
precursor is the human fibroblast. Evidence for a fibroblast precursor includes its location in the dermis, which is thought to be the primary site of origin for MCC. Additionally, in vitro experiments have demonstrated that fibroblasts not only support MCV infection but can be induced into having a MCC
have been shown to have oncogenic potential, and have therefore been proposed as a possible site for a MCC precursor.Finally, the presence of B-cell surface markers on MCC in addition to the high correlation between MCC and B-cell lymphomatous cancers have also led to suggestions
% of MCC tumors are infected with MCV, with the virus integrated into the host genome in a monoclonal pattern. However, the majority of people with MCV infection do not develop MCC: MCV is a ubiquitous virus and infection commonly occurs during childhood but remains asymptomatic throughout an individual
known as the large tumor antigen (LT) and small tumor antigen (sT). Normally, patients infected with MCV show low levels of antibodies to the LT protein, perhaps due to a nuclear localization domain in its C-terminal that limits its cellular dispersion. However,
. This is suspected to be due to the inability of the body to defend itself from infection by or reactivation of MVC. The body of data indicating the importance of immune function in MCC pathogenesis has been exploited for the development of immunotherapies discussed below.Diagnosis of MCC begins with
infection by or reactivation of MVC. The body of data indicating the importance of immune function in MCC pathogenesis has been exploited for the development of immunotherapies discussed below.Diagnosis of MCC begins with a clinical examination of the skin and lymph nodes. Following clinical exam, definitive diagnosis of
with a clinical examination of the skin and lymph nodes. Following clinical exam, definitive diagnosis of Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) requires examination of biopsy tissue to identify its histopathologic features. An ideal biopsy specimen is either a punch biopsy or a full-thickness incisional biopsy of the
(IHC) is also generally required to differentiate MCC from other morphologically similar tumors such as small cell lung cancer, the small cell variant of melanoma, various cutaneous leukemic/lymphoid neoplasms, and Ewing's sarcoma. Neuroendocrine molecular markers such as synaptophysin or chromogranin A are characteristic of
first step and primary goal of surgical treatment is to obtain negative histologic margins with 1-cm to 2-cm margins. Retrospective analyses of data from the National Comprehensive Database (NCDB) suggest no difference in the overall and relative survival of patients with stage I to II MCC
2-cm margins. Retrospective analyses of data from the National Comprehensive Database (NCDB) suggest no difference in the overall and relative survival of patients with stage I to II MCC who were treated with wide local excision versus MMS.Radiation therapy may be used following surgical excision (adjuvant therapy
were no FDA-approved standard chemotherapy regimens for MCC treatment. The most recent American guidelines do not recommend adjuvant chemotherapy, citing a lack of evidence to suggest improved outcomes. Instead, consideration of the need for chemotherapy on a case-by-case basis is recommended.Immunotherapies
regulating the balance between T-cell activation and over-activation leading to T-cell exhaustion or autoimmunity. However, over-expression of PD-1 ligands (PDL1) have been observed in tumors as a method of evading immune attack. PD-1 inhibition therefore enhances the body's immune
response rate between 50–65% for MCC treated with PD-1 pathway inhibitors. Suggestions for further immunotherapy research areas have included therapeutic vaccines or epigenetic modification of HLA-receptors.According to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), the natural course of MCC is “variable and depends
on the stage at diagnosis". Staging of MCC is classified according to the TNM staging system, a notation system that describes the stage of cancer according to the size of the primary tumor (T), the degree of spread to regional lymph nodes (N), and
staging system, a notation system that describes the stage of cancer according to the size of the primary tumor (T), the degree of spread to regional lymph nodes (N), and the presence of distant metastasis (M). A combination of T, N,
, IV). Advanced stage (i.e. increased size of the tumor, spreading of the tumor into surrounding and/or distant tissue, and involvement of lymph nodes) is associated with lower survival rates.The National Cancer Data Base has survival rates collected from nearly 3000 MCC patients from year
in the blood to the Merkel cell polyomavirus oncoprotein can be used as a treatment response biomarker in people that have detectable antibodies at the time of diagnosis.Merkel cell carcinoma occurs most often in Caucasians between 60 and 80 years of age. Its incidence is about twice as high in
biomarker in people that have detectable antibodies at the time of diagnosis.Merkel cell carcinoma occurs most often in Caucasians between 60 and 80 years of age. Its incidence is about twice as high in males as in females. It is a rare type of skin cancer, with a
between 60 and 80 years of age. Its incidence is about twice as high in males as in females. It is a rare type of skin cancer, with a 2013 incidence of only 0.7 per 100,000 persons in the U.S. As of 2005, roughly 2,500 new cases of MCC
is most commonly found in regions with increased sun exposure. Australia is the country with the highest incidence of MCC but has a lower incidence of MCV-positive MCC than observed in other countries.Since 2006, it has been known that other primary cancers increase the risk of MCC
facial skull is important because the bones are the attachment points for the facial muscles.Increased voice resonanceProviding a shockproof "buffer" in case of injuriesIsolation of sensitive structures (roots of teeth, eyeballs) from rapid temperature fluctuations in the nasal cavity during inhalation and exhalation.Humidification and
are the attachment points for the facial muscles.Increased voice resonanceProviding a shockproof "buffer" in case of injuriesIsolation of sensitive structures (roots of teeth, eyeballs) from rapid temperature fluctuations in the nasal cavity during inhalation and exhalation.Humidification and warming of the inhaled air, thanks
.Humidification and warming of the inhaled air, thanks to the slow air flow in the sinuses.Perform the function of a sensory system of air signals (a baroreceptor organ that responds to changes in environmental pressure).Paranasal sinuses form developmentally through excavation of bone by air-filled sacs (
Perform the function of a sensory system of air signals (a baroreceptor organ that responds to changes in environmental pressure).Paranasal sinuses form developmentally through excavation of bone by air-filled sacs (pneumatic diverticula) from the nasal cavity. This process begins prenatally (intrauterine life), and it
pneumatic diverticula) from the nasal cavity. This process begins prenatally (intrauterine life), and it continues through the course of an organism's lifetime.The results of experimental studies suggest that the natural ventilation rate of a sinus with a single sinus ostium (opening) is extremely
help prevent drying of its mucosal surface and maintain a near-sterile environment with high carbon dioxide concentrations and minimal pathogen access. Thus composition of gas content in the maxillary sinus is similar to venous blood, with high carbon dioxide and lower oxygen levels compared to breathing air.At
become blocked easily by allergic inflammation, or by swelling in the nasal lining that occurs with a cold. If this happens, normal drainage of mucus within the sinuses is disrupted, and sinusitis may occur. Because the maxillary posterior teeth are close to the maxillary sinus, this can

cancer that develops from the lining of the stomach. Most cases of stomach cancers are gastric carcinomas, which can be divided into a number of subtypes including gastric adenocarcinomas. Lymphomas and mesenchymal tumors may also develop in the stomach. Early symptoms may include heartburn, upper abdominal pain,
adenocarcinomas. Lymphomas and mesenchymal tumors may also develop in the stomach. Early symptoms may include heartburn, upper abdominal pain, nausea and loss of appetite. Later signs and symptoms may include weight loss, yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes, vomiting, difficulty swallowing and
of the abdomen and lymph nodes.The most common cause is infection by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori, which accounts for more than 60% of cases. Certain types of H. pylori have greater risks than others. Smoking, dietary factors such as pickled vegetables and obesity are other risk
nodes.The most common cause is infection by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori, which accounts for more than 60% of cases. Certain types of H. pylori have greater risks than others. Smoking, dietary factors such as pickled vegetables and obesity are other risk factors. About 10%
H. pylori have greater risks than others. Smoking, dietary factors such as pickled vegetables and obesity are other risk factors. About 10% of cases run in families, and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such
as pickled vegetables and obesity are other risk factors. About 10% of cases run in families, and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Most of the time, stomach cancer
10% of cases run in families, and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Most of the time, stomach cancer develops in stages over years. Diagnosis is usually by biopsy
Japan and South Korea, two countries that have high rates of the disease, screen for stomach cancer.A Mediterranean diet lowers the risk of stomach cancer, as does the stopping of smoking. There is tentative evidence that treating H. pylori decreases the future risk. If stomach cancer
have high rates of the disease, screen for stomach cancer.A Mediterranean diet lowers the risk of stomach cancer, as does the stopping of smoking. There is tentative evidence that treating H. pylori decreases the future risk. If stomach cancer is treated early, it can be cured
that treating H. pylori decreases the future risk. If stomach cancer is treated early, it can be cured. Treatments may include some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and targeted therapy. If treated late, palliative care may be advised. Some types of lymphoma can be
include some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and targeted therapy. If treated late, palliative care may be advised. Some types of lymphoma can be cured by eliminating H. pylori. Outcomes are often poor, with a less than 10% five-year survival rate in
it is over 65% and Japan over 70%, partly due to screening efforts.Globally, stomach cancer is the fifth leading type of cancer and the third leading cause of death from cancer, making up 7% of cases and 9% of deaths. In 2018,
over 70%, partly due to screening efforts.Globally, stomach cancer is the fifth leading type of cancer and the third leading cause of death from cancer, making up 7% of cases and 9% of deaths. In 2018, it newly occurred in 1.03 million people
.Globally, stomach cancer is the fifth leading type of cancer and the third leading cause of death from cancer, making up 7% of cases and 9% of deaths. In 2018, it newly occurred in 1.03 million people and caused 783,000 deaths. Before the 1930s,
is the fifth leading type of cancer and the third leading cause of death from cancer, making up 7% of cases and 9% of deaths. In 2018, it newly occurred in 1.03 million people and caused 783,000 deaths. Before the 1930s, in much of the world
caused 783,000 deaths. Before the 1930s, in much of the world, including most Western developed countries, it was the most common cause of death from cancer. Rates of death have been decreasing in many areas of the world since then. This is believed to be due to
1930s, in much of the world, including most Western developed countries, it was the most common cause of death from cancer. Rates of death have been decreasing in many areas of the world since then. This is believed to be due to the eating of less salted and
the world since then. This is believed to be due to the eating of less salted and pickled foods as a result of the development of refrigeration as a method of keeping food fresh. Stomach cancer occurs most commonly in East Asia and Eastern Europe. It occurs twice as often
(heartburn). However, fewer than 1 in every 50 people referred for endoscopy due to indigestion has cancer. Abdominal discomfort and loss of appetite, especially for meat, can occur.Gastric cancers that have enlarged and invaded normal tissue can cause weakness, fatigue, bloating of
a result of many factors. It occurs twice as commonly in males as females. Estrogen may protect women against the development of this form of cancer.Helicobacter pylori infection is an essential risk factor in 65–80% of gastric cancers, but only 2% of people with Helicobacter infections
development of this form of cancer.Helicobacter pylori infection is an essential risk factor in 65–80% of gastric cancers, but only 2% of people with Helicobacter infections develop stomach cancer. The mechanism by which H. pylori induces stomach cancer potentially involves chronic inflammation, or the action of
of people with Helicobacter infections develop stomach cancer. The mechanism by which H. pylori induces stomach cancer potentially involves chronic inflammation, or the action of H. pylori virulence factors such as CagA. It was estimated that Epstein–Barr virus is responsible for 84,000 cases per year. AIDS is also
foods, salt and salt-rich foods, red meat, processed meat, pickled vegetables, and bracken are associated with a higher risk of stomach cancer. Nitrates and nitrites in cured meats can be converted by certain bacteria, including H. pylori, into compounds that have been found
to cause stomach cancer in animals.Fresh fruit and vegetable intake, citrus fruit intake, and antioxidant intake are associated with a lower risk of stomach cancer. A Mediterranean diet is associated with lower rates of stomach cancer, as is regular aspirin use.Obesity is a physical risk
, citrus fruit intake, and antioxidant intake are associated with a lower risk of stomach cancer. A Mediterranean diet is associated with lower rates of stomach cancer, as is regular aspirin use.Obesity is a physical risk factor that has been found to increase the risk of gastric adenocarcinoma
found to increase more than 2 times for an obese person. There is a correlation between iodine deficiency and gastric cancer.About 10% of cases run in families and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as
There is a correlation between iodine deficiency and gastric cancer.About 10% of cases run in families and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.A genetic risk factor for gastric cancer
About 10% of cases run in families and between 1% and 3% of cases are due to genetic syndromes inherited from a person's parents such as hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.A genetic risk factor for gastric cancer is a genetic defect of the CDH1 gene known as hereditary
mutation, gastric cancer develops through a mechanism that is not fully understood. This mutation is considered autosomal dominant meaning that half of a carrier's children will likely experience the same mutation. Diagnosis of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer usually takes place when at least two cases involving a family member
, pernicious anemia, chronic atrophic gastritis, Menetrier's disease (hyperplastic, hypersecretory gastropathy), and intestinal metaplasia.To find the cause of symptoms, the doctor asks about the patient's medical history, does a physical exam, and may order laboratory studies. The patient may
, and may order laboratory studies. The patient may also have one or all of the following exams:Gastroscopic exam is the diagnostic method of choice. This involves insertion of a fibre optic camera into the stomach to visualise it.Upper GI series (may be called barium roentgenogram).Computed
roentgenogram).Computed tomography or CT scanning of the abdomen may reveal gastric cancer. It is more useful to determine invasion into adjacent tissues or the presence of spread to local lymph nodes. Wall thickening of more than 1 cm that is focal, eccentric and enhancing favours malignancy.In 2013,
to check for the presence of cancerous cells. A biopsy, with subsequent histological analysis, is the only sure way to confirm the presence of cancer cells.Various gastroscopic modalities have been developed to increase yield of detected mucosa with a dye that accentuates the cell structure and can identify
cells.Various gastroscopic modalities have been developed to increase yield of detected mucosa with a dye that accentuates the cell structure and can identify areas of dysplasia. Endocytoscopy involves ultra-high magnification to visualise cellular structure to better determine areas of dysplasia. Other gastroscopic modalities such as optical coherence
that accentuates the cell structure and can identify areas of dysplasia. Endocytoscopy involves ultra-high magnification to visualise cellular structure to better determine areas of dysplasia. Other gastroscopic modalities such as optical coherence tomography are being tested investigationally for similar applications.A number of cutaneous conditions are associated with
tripe palms (a similar darkening hyperplasia of the skin of the palms) and the Leser-Trelat sign, which is the rapid development of skin lesions known as seborrheic keratoses.Various blood tests may be done including a complete blood count (CBC) to check for anaemia,
. Often, it associates intestinal metaplasia in neighbouring mucosa. Depending on glandular architecture, cellular pleomorphism and mucosecretion, adenocarcinoma may present 3 degrees of differentiation: well, moderate and poorly differentiated. Diffuse type adenocarcinoma (mucinous, colloid, linitis plastica or leather-bottle stomach) tumour
linitis plastica or leather-bottle stomach) tumour cells are discohesive and secrete mucus, which is delivered in the interstitium, producing large pools of mucus/colloid (optically "empty" spaces). It is poorly differentiated. If the mucus remains inside the tumour cell, it
B-cell lymphomas (MALT type) and to a lesser extent diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. MALT type make up about half of stomach lymphomas.Carcinoid and stromal tumors may occur.				If cancer cells are found in the tissue sample, the next step is to
tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) may be ordered, as their levels correlate to extent of metastasis, especially to the liver, and the cure rate.Staging may not be complete until after surgery. The surgeon removes nearby lymph
the liver, and the cure rate.Staging may not be complete until after surgery. The surgeon removes nearby lymph nodes and possibly samples of tissue from other areas in the abdomen for examination by a pathologist.The clinical stages of stomach cancer are:Stage 0. Limited to
The surgeon removes nearby lymph nodes and possibly samples of tissue from other areas in the abdomen for examination by a pathologist.The clinical stages of stomach cancer are:Stage 0. Limited to the inner lining of the stomach. Treatable by endoscopic mucosal resection when found very early (
and 18% in Stage III. However, in a high-risk population in the Valdivia Province of southern Chile, only 5% of patients were diagnosed in the first two stages and 10% in stage III.Getting rid of H. pylori in those who are infected decreases the risk
patients were diagnosed in the first two stages and 10% in stage III.Getting rid of H. pylori in those who are infected decreases the risk of stomach cancer, at least in those who are Asian. A 2014 meta-analysis of observational studies found that a diet high in fruits
of observational studies found that a diet high in fruits, mushrooms, garlic, soybeans, and green onions was associated with a lower risk of stomach cancer in the Korean population. Low doses of vitamins, especially from a healthy diet, decrease the risk of stomach cancer. A
, mushrooms, garlic, soybeans, and green onions was associated with a lower risk of stomach cancer in the Korean population. Low doses of vitamins, especially from a healthy diet, decrease the risk of stomach cancer. A previous review of antioxidant supplementation did not find supporting evidence
with a lower risk of stomach cancer in the Korean population. Low doses of vitamins, especially from a healthy diet, decrease the risk of stomach cancer. A previous review of antioxidant supplementation did not find supporting evidence and possibly worse outcomes.Cancer of the stomach is difficult to
pioneered in Japan and is available in the United States at some centers. In this procedure, the tumor, together with the inner lining of stomach (mucosa), is removed from the wall of the stomach using an electrical wire loop through the endoscope. The advantage is that
operation than removing the stomach. Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is a similar technique pioneered in Japan, used to resect a large area of mucosa in one piece. If the pathologic examination of the resected specimen shows incomplete resection or deep invasion by tumor, the patient would need
stomach resection. A 2016 Cochrane review found low quality evidence of no difference in short-term mortality between laparoscopic and open gastrectomy (removal of stomach), and that benefits or harms of laparoscopic gastrectomy cannot be ruled out. Post-operatively, up to 70% of
of stomach), and that benefits or harms of laparoscopic gastrectomy cannot be ruled out. Post-operatively, up to 70% of people undergoing total gastrectomy develop complications such as dumping syndrome and reflux esophagitis. Construction of a "pouch", which serves as a "
as dumping syndrome and reflux esophagitis. Construction of a "pouch", which serves as a "stomach substitute", reduced the incidence of dumping syndrome and reflux esophagitis by 73% and 63% respectively, and led to improvements in quality-of-life, nutritional outcomes
and led to improvements in quality-of-life, nutritional outcomes, and body mass index.Those with metastatic disease at the time of presentation may receive palliative surgery and while it remains controversial, due to the possibility of complications from the surgery itself and the fact that it
mass index.Those with metastatic disease at the time of presentation may receive palliative surgery and while it remains controversial, due to the possibility of complications from the surgery itself and the fact that it may delay chemotherapy the data so far is mostly positive, with improved survival rates being
may delay chemotherapy the data so far is mostly positive, with improved survival rates being seen in those treated with this approach.The use of chemotherapy to treat stomach cancer has no firmly established standard of care. Unfortunately, stomach cancer has not been particularly sensitive to these drugs,
with improved survival rates being seen in those treated with this approach.The use of chemotherapy to treat stomach cancer has no firmly established standard of care. Unfortunately, stomach cancer has not been particularly sensitive to these drugs, and chemotherapy, if used, has usually served to palliatively
in inoperable locally advanced or metastatic gastric carcinoma over-expressing the HER2/neu gene. In particular, HER2 is overexpressed in 13–22% of patients with gastric cancer. Of note, HER2 overexpression in gastric neoplasia is heterogeneous and comprises a minority of tumor cells (less than 10
HER2 is overexpressed in 13–22% of patients with gastric cancer. Of note, HER2 overexpression in gastric neoplasia is heterogeneous and comprises a minority of tumor cells (less than 10% of gastric cancers overexpress HER2 in more than 5% of tumor cells). Hence, this heterogeneous
gastric neoplasia is heterogeneous and comprises a minority of tumor cells (less than 10% of gastric cancers overexpress HER2 in more than 5% of tumor cells). Hence, this heterogeneous expression should be taken into account for HER2 testing, particularly in small samples such as biopsies,
Lymphoma of the MALT type can often be fully treated by treating an underlying H. pylori infection. This results in remission in about 80% of cases.The prognosis of stomach cancer is generally poor, due to the fact the tumour has often metastasised by the time of discovery and
can often be fully treated by treating an underlying H. pylori infection. This results in remission in about 80% of cases.The prognosis of stomach cancer is generally poor, due to the fact the tumour has often metastasised by the time of discovery and the fact that most people
80% of cases.The prognosis of stomach cancer is generally poor, due to the fact the tumour has often metastasised by the time of discovery and the fact that most people with the condition are elderly (median age is between 70 and 75 years) at presentation. The
with 952,000 cases diagnosed in 2012. It is more common both in men and in developing countries. In 2012, it represented 8.5% of cancer cases in men, making it the fourth most-common cancer in men. Also in 2012, the number of deaths was 700,000
represented 8.5% of cancer cases in men, making it the fourth most-common cancer in men. Also in 2012, the number of deaths was 700,000 having decreased slightly from 774,000 in 1990, making it the third-leading cause of cancer-related death (after lung
. Also in 2012, the number of deaths was 700,000 having decreased slightly from 774,000 in 1990, making it the third-leading cause of cancer-related death (after lung cancer and liver cancer).Less than 5% of stomach cancers occur in people under 40 years of age with
774,000 in 1990, making it the third-leading cause of cancer-related death (after lung cancer and liver cancer).Less than 5% of stomach cancers occur in people under 40 years of age with 81.1% of that 5% in the age-group of 30 to 39
leading cause of cancer-related death (after lung cancer and liver cancer).Less than 5% of stomach cancers occur in people under 40 years of age with 81.1% of that 5% in the age-group of 30 to 39 and 18.9% in the age-group of
-group of 30 to 39 and 18.9% in the age-group of 20 to 29.In 2014, stomach cancer resulted in 0.61% of deaths (13,303 cases) in the U.S. In China, stomach cancer accounted for 3.56% of all deaths (324,439 cases). The
13,303 cases) in the U.S. In China, stomach cancer accounted for 3.56% of all deaths (324,439 cases). The highest rate of stomach cancer was in Mongolia, at 28 cases per 100,000 people.In the United Kingdom, stomach cancer is the fifteenth most-common
most-common cancer (around 7,100 people were diagnosed with stomach cancer in 2011), and it is the tenth most-common cause of cancer-related deaths (around 4,800 people died in 2012).Incidence and mortality rates of gastric cancer vary greatly in Africa. The GLOBOCAN system is
types have been reported. Signs vary but may include vomiting (especially if blood is present), weight loss, anemia, and lack of appetite. Bowel movements may be dark and tarry in nature. In order to determine whether cancer is present in the stomach, special X
useful diagnostic tool that can also take samples of the suspected mass for histopathological analysis to confirm or rule out cancer. The most definitive method of cancer diagnosis is through open surgical biopsy. Most stomach tumors are malignant with evidence of spread to lymph nodes or liver, making treatment difficult
confirm or rule out cancer. The most definitive method of cancer diagnosis is through open surgical biopsy. Most stomach tumors are malignant with evidence of spread to lymph nodes or liver, making treatment difficult. Except for lymphoma, surgery is the most frequent treatment option for stomach cancers but

and spindle cell/sclerosing rhabdomyosarcoma. Embryonal, and alveolar are the main groups, and these types are the most common soft tissue sarcomas of childhood and adolescence. The pleomorphic type is usually found in adults.It is generally considered to be a disease of childhood, as the
common soft tissue sarcomas of childhood and adolescence. The pleomorphic type is usually found in adults.It is generally considered to be a disease of childhood, as the vast majority of cases occur in those below the age of 18. It is commonly described as one of the small
adolescence. The pleomorphic type is usually found in adults.It is generally considered to be a disease of childhood, as the vast majority of cases occur in those below the age of 18. It is commonly described as one of the small-blue-round-cell tumors
cases occur in those below the age of 18. It is commonly described as one of the small-blue-round-cell tumors of childhood due to its appearance on an H&E stain. Despite being relatively rare, it accounts for approximately 40% of all recorded soft tissue
abnormalities. Signs and symptoms vary according to tumor site, and prognosis is closely tied to the location of the primary tumor. Common sites of metastasis include the lungs, bone marrow, and bones. There are many classification systems for RMS and a variety of defined histological types.
are many classification systems for RMS and a variety of defined histological types. Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common type and comprises about 60% of cases.Outcomes vary considerably, with 5 years survival rates between 35% and 95% depending on the type of RMS involved, so
is often difficult due to the heterogeneity of RMS tumors and a lack of strong genetic markers of the disease. Treatment usually involves a combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation. Sixty percent to 70% of newly diagnosed patients with nonmetastatic disease can be cured using this combined approach
of newly diagnosed patients with nonmetastatic disease can be cured using this combined approach to therapy. Despite aggressive multimodality treatment, less than 20% of patients with metastatic RMS are able to be cured of their disease. Given the difficulty in diagnosing rhabdomyosarcoma, definitive classification of subtypes has proven
than 20% of patients with metastatic RMS are able to be cured of their disease. Given the difficulty in diagnosing rhabdomyosarcoma, definitive classification of subtypes has proven difficult. As a result, classification systems vary by institute and organization. However, rhabdomyosarcoma in the 2020 WHO classification is
alveolar, pleomorphic, and spindle cell/sclerosing.Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) is the most common histological variant, comprising approximately 60–70% of childhood cases. It is most common in children 0–4 years old, with a maximum reported incidence of 4 cases per 1 million children.
arise in the retroperitoneum and mediastinum can become quite large before producing signs and symptoms. Parameningeal tumors may present with cranial nerve dysfunction, symptoms of sinusitis, ear discharge, headaches, and facial pain. Orbital tumors often present with orbital swelling and proptosis. Extremity tumors generally present as
often present with orbital swelling and proptosis. Extremity tumors generally present as a rapidly enlarging, firm mass in the relevant tissue. The cancer's prevalence in the head, face, and neck will often allow for earlier signs of the disease simply due to the obvious nature of tumors
cancer's prevalence in the head, face, and neck will often allow for earlier signs of the disease simply due to the obvious nature of tumors in these locations. Despite the varying presentation and typically aggressive nature of the disease, RMS has the potential to be diagnosed and treated
typically aggressive nature of the disease, RMS has the potential to be diagnosed and treated early. The fourth IRSG study found that 23% of patients were diagnosed in time for a complete resection of their cancer, and 15% had resection with only minimal remnants of the diseased cells
, q15). Both involve the translocation of a DNA binding domain of either PAX3 or PAX7, a member of the Paired Box family of transcription factors, to a transactivation site on FOXO1 (previously known as FKHR), a member of the forkhead/HNF-3 transcription factor family
RMS. The t(2;13) translocation can result in the PAX3-FKHR fusion product, which is indicative of classic cystic ARMS.  Cases of FP-RMS are associated with a poorer prognosis than fusion-negative RMS.The fusion protein presents a potential therapeutic target, and in recent years
-RMS subtypes were especially sensitive to inhibitors (such as JQ1) of a super enhancer bound protein BRD4.Embryonal RMS usually presents with a loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the short arm of chromosome 11 (p11,15.5). This region is associated with multiple oncogenes, and the potential
such as JQ1) of a super enhancer bound protein BRD4.Embryonal RMS usually presents with a loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the short arm of chromosome 11 (p11,15.5). This region is associated with multiple oncogenes, and the potential loss-of-function of this region is
of a tumor suppressor. However, the specific consequences of this LOH at (p11,15.5) have yet to be determined. The short arm of chromosome 11 is also the site of the insulin-like growth factor 2 gene (IGF-2), which is often over-expressed in
of the insulin-like growth factor 2 gene (IGF-2), which is often over-expressed in RMS.The loss-of-function of tumor suppressor p53 is associated with many cancers including rhabdomyosarcoma, and approximately 50% of RMS cases have been shown to carry some form of
of tumor suppressor p53 is associated with many cancers including rhabdomyosarcoma, and approximately 50% of RMS cases have been shown to carry some form of mutation to the P53 gene. Other oncogenes often associated with rhabdomyosarcoma, albeit with less frequency, include NMYC, NRAS, KRAS, P16
the MAP kinase pathway known as a MEK inhibitor.Rhabdomyosarcoma is often difficult to diagnose due to its similarities to other cancers and varying levels of differentiation. It is loosely classified as one of the small-blue-round-cell tumors due to its appearance on an H&E stain
The alveolar type of RMS tends to have stronger muscle-specific protein staining. Electron microscopy may also aid in diagnosis, with the presence of actin and myosin or Z bands pointing to a positive diagnosis of RMS. Classification into types and subtypes is accomplished through further analysis of cellular
pointing to a positive diagnosis of RMS. Classification into types and subtypes is accomplished through further analysis of cellular morphology (alveolar spacings, presence of cambium layer, aneuploidy, etc.) as well as genetic sequencing of tumor cells. Some genetic markers, such as the PAX3-
accomplished through further analysis of cellular morphology (alveolar spacings, presence of cambium layer, aneuploidy, etc.) as well as genetic sequencing of tumor cells. Some genetic markers, such as the PAX3-FKHR fusion gene expression in alveolar RMS, can aid in diagnosis. Open
the IRSG. This system accounts for tumor size (> or <5 cm), lymph node involvement, tumor site, and presence of metastasis. It grades on a scale of 1 to 4 based on these criteria. In addition, patients are sorted by clinical group (
four risk categories based on tumor grade and clinical group, and these risk categories have been shown to be highly predictive of outcome.Treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma is a multidisciplinary practice involving the use of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and possibly immunotherapy. Surgery is generally the first step in
group, and these risk categories have been shown to be highly predictive of outcome.Treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma is a multidisciplinary practice involving the use of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and possibly immunotherapy. Surgery is generally the first step in a combined therapeutic approach. Resectability varies depending on
Resectability varies depending on tumor site, and RMS often presents in sites that don't allow for full surgical resection without significant morbidity and loss of function. Less than 20% of RMS tumors are fully resected with negative margins. Rhabdomyosarcomas are highly chemosensitive, with approximately 80% of
of function. Less than 20% of RMS tumors are fully resected with negative margins. Rhabdomyosarcomas are highly chemosensitive, with approximately 80% of cases responding to chemotherapy. In fact, multi-agent chemotherapy is indicated for all patients with rhabdomyosarcoma. Before the use of adjuvant and
solely by surgical means had a survival rate of <20%. Modern survival rates with adjuvant therapy are approximately 60–70%.There are two main methods of chemotherapy treatment for RMS. There is the VAC regimen, consisting of vincristine, actinomycin D, and cyclophosphamide, and the IVA regimen,
cycles depending on the staging of the disease and other therapies used.  Other drug and therapy combinations may also show additional benefit. Addition of doxorubicin and cisplatin to the VAC regimen was shown to increase survival rates of patients with alveolar-type, early-stage RMS in IRS
Other drug and therapy combinations may also show additional benefit. Addition of doxorubicin and cisplatin to the VAC regimen was shown to increase survival rates of patients with alveolar-type, early-stage RMS in IRS study III, and this same addition improved survival rates and doubled bladder salvage
no evidence to support the use of high-dose chemotherapy as a standard therapy.Radiation therapy, which kill cancer cells with focused doses of radiation, is often indicated in the treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma, and the exclusion of this treatment from disease management has been shown to increase recurrence
dose chemotherapy as a standard therapy.Radiation therapy, which kill cancer cells with focused doses of radiation, is often indicated in the treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma, and the exclusion of this treatment from disease management has been shown to increase recurrence rates. Radiation therapy is used when resecting the
. Generally, in any case where a lack of complete resection is suspected, radiation therapy is indicated. Administration is usually following 6–12 weeks of chemotherapy if tumor cells are still present. The exception to this schedule is the presence of parameningeal tumors that have invaded the brain, spinal
from this new, immune-based approach.Prognosis in rhabdomyosarcoma patients has been shown to be dependent on age, tumor site, resectability of tumor, tumor size, regional lymph node involvement, presence of metastasis, site and extent of metastasis, and biological and histopathological characteristics of
patients has been shown to be dependent on age, tumor site, resectability of tumor, tumor size, regional lymph node involvement, presence of metastasis, site and extent of metastasis, and biological and histopathological characteristics of the tumor cells. Survival after recurrence is poor, and new
dependent on age, tumor site, resectability of tumor, tumor size, regional lymph node involvement, presence of metastasis, site and extent of metastasis, and biological and histopathological characteristics of the tumor cells. Survival after recurrence is poor, and new salvage therapy strategies are needed Rhabdomyosarcoma
at approximately 4.5 case per 1 million children/adolescents with approximately 250 new cases in the United States each year. With the vast majority of cases of RMS occurring in children or adolescents, two-thirds of reported cases occur in youths under the age of 10. RMS also
syndrome, Li–Fraumeni syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome, and Costello syndrome. It has also been associated with parental use of cocaine and marijuana.Rhabdomyosarcoma was first described by Weber, a German physician, in 1845, but it wasn't until the paper by
, in 1845, but it wasn't until the paper by Arthur Stout in 1946 that RMS was formally classified. The first thirty years of investigation were conducted by the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group (IRSG), an independent National Cancer Institute (NCI)-funded cooperative that has become a part
IRSG), an independent National Cancer Institute (NCI)-funded cooperative that has become a part of the Children's Oncology Group.Cancer stem cells of rhabdomyosarcoma have been identified and fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 has been suggested as their marker. Preclinical animal studies that try to use conditionally replicating

bowel movements, weight loss, and fatigue.Most colorectal cancers are due to old age and lifestyle factors, with only a small number of cases due to underlying genetic disorders. Risk factors include diet, obesity, smoking, and lack of physical activity. Dietary factors that increase
disorders that can cause colorectal cancer include familial adenomatous polyposis and hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer; however, these represent less than 5% of cases. It typically starts as a benign tumor, often in the form of a polyp, which over time becomes cancerous.Bowel cancer
determine whether the disease has spread. Screening is effective for preventing and decreasing deaths from colorectal cancer. Screening, by one of a number of methods, is recommended starting from the age of 50 to 75. During colonoscopy, small polyps may be removed if found. If a
Their general use is not recommended for this purpose, however, due to side effects.Treatments used for colorectal cancer may include some combination of surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy and targeted therapy. Cancers that are confined within the wall of the colon may be curable with surgery,
the colon may be curable with surgery, while cancer that has spread widely is usually not curable, with management being directed towards improving quality of life and symptoms. The five-year survival rate in the United States is around 65%. The individual likelihood of survival depends on
towards improving quality of life and symptoms. The five-year survival rate in the United States is around 65%. The individual likelihood of survival depends on how advanced the cancer is, whether or not all the cancer can be removed with surgery and the person's overall health
not all the cancer can be removed with surgery and the person's overall health. Globally, colorectal cancer is the third most common type of cancer, making up about 10% of all cases. In 2018, there were 1.09 million new cases and 551,000 deaths from the disease
there were 1.09 million new cases and 551,000 deaths from the disease. It is more common in developed countries, where more than 65% of cases are found. It is less common in women than men.The signs and symptoms of colorectal cancer depend on the location of the
metastasis). The classic warning signs include: worsening constipation, blood in the stool, decrease in stool caliber (thickness), loss of appetite, loss of weight, and nausea or vomiting in someone over 50 years old. Around 50% of individuals with colorectal cancer do
classic warning signs include: worsening constipation, blood in the stool, decrease in stool caliber (thickness), loss of appetite, loss of weight, and nausea or vomiting in someone over 50 years old. Around 50% of individuals with colorectal cancer do not report any symptoms
(thickness), loss of appetite, loss of weight, and nausea or vomiting in someone over 50 years old. Around 50% of individuals with colorectal cancer do not report any symptoms.Rectal bleeding or anemia are high-risk symptoms in people over the age of 50
symptoms.Rectal bleeding or anemia are high-risk symptoms in people over the age of 50. Weight loss and changes in a person's bowel habit are typically only concerning if they are associated with rectal bleeding.75–95% of colorectal cancer cases occur in people with little or no genetic
% of colorectal cancer cases occur in people with little or no genetic risk. Risk factors include older age, male sex, high intake of fat, sugar, alcohol, red meat, processed meats, obesity, smoking, and a lack of physical exercise. Approximately 10%
fat, sugar, alcohol, red meat, processed meats, obesity, smoking, and a lack of physical exercise. Approximately 10% of cases are linked to insufficient activity. The risk from alcohol appears to increase at greater than one drink per day. Drinking 5 glasses of
of cases are linked to insufficient activity. The risk from alcohol appears to increase at greater than one drink per day. Drinking 5 glasses of water a day is linked to a decrease in the risk of colorectal cancer and adenomatous polyps. Streptococcus gallolyticus is associated with colorectal cancer.
cancer and adenomatous polyps. Streptococcus gallolyticus is associated with colorectal cancer. Some strains of Streptococcus bovis/Streptococcus equinus complex are consumed by millions of people daily and thus may be safe. 25 to 80% of people with Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus bacteremia have concomitant colorectal tumors. Seroprevalence
Some strains of Streptococcus bovis/Streptococcus equinus complex are consumed by millions of people daily and thus may be safe. 25 to 80% of people with Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus bacteremia have concomitant colorectal tumors. Seroprevalence of Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus is considered as a candidate practical marker for
as a candidate practical marker for the early prediction of an underlying bowel lesion at high risk population. It has been suggested that the presence of antibodies to Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus antigens or the antigens themselves in the bloodstream may act as markers for the carcinogenesis in the colon.People
as markers for the carcinogenesis in the colon.People with inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease) are at increased risk of colon cancer. The risk increases the longer a person has the disease, and the worse the severity of inflammation. In these high risk
disease) are at increased risk of colon cancer. The risk increases the longer a person has the disease, and the worse the severity of inflammation. In these high risk groups, both prevention with aspirin and regular colonoscopies are recommended. Endoscopic surveillance in this high-risk population
through early diagnosis and may also reduce the chances of dying from colon cancer. People with inflammatory bowel disease account for less than 2% of colon cancer cases yearly. In those with Crohn's disease, 2% get colorectal cancer after 10 years, 8% after 20 years
a family history in two or more first-degree relatives (such as a parent or sibling) have a two to threefold greater risk of disease and this group accounts for about 20% of all cases. A number of genetic syndromes are also associated with higher rates of colorectal
colorectal cancer. The most common of these is hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC or Lynch syndrome) which is present in about 3% of people with colorectal cancer. Other syndromes that are strongly associated with colorectal cancer include Gardner syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). For
1% of the cancer cases. A total proctocolectomy may be recommended for people with FAP as a preventative measure due to the high risk of malignancy. Colectomy, removal of the colon, may not suffice as a preventative measure because of the high risk of rectal cancer if the
rectum remains. The most common polyposis syndrome affecting the colon is serrated polyposis syndrome, which is associated with a 25-40% risk of CRC.Mutations in the pair of genes (POLE and POLD1) have been associated with familial colon cancer.Most deaths due to colon cancer are
common polyposis syndrome affecting the colon is serrated polyposis syndrome, which is associated with a 25-40% risk of CRC.Mutations in the pair of genes (POLE and POLD1) have been associated with familial colon cancer.Most deaths due to colon cancer are associated with metastatic disease.
metastatic disease, metastasis associated in colon cancer 1 (MACC1), has been isolated. It is a transcriptional factor that influences the expression of hepatocyte growth factor. This gene is associated with the proliferation, invasion and scattering of colon cancer cells in cell culture, and tumor growth
. It is a transcriptional factor that influences the expression of hepatocyte growth factor. This gene is associated with the proliferation, invasion and scattering of colon cancer cells in cell culture, and tumor growth and metastasis in mice. MACC1 may be a potential target for cancer intervention, but
a potential target for cancer intervention, but this possibility needs to be confirmed with clinical studies.Epigenetic factors, such as abnormal DNA methylation of tumor suppressor promoters, play a role in the development of colorectal cancer.Ashkenazi Jews have a 6% higher risk rate of getting adenomas
.Colorectal cancer is a disease originating from the epithelial cells lining the colon or rectum of the gastrointestinal tract, most frequently as a result of mutations in the Wnt signaling pathway that increase signaling activity. The mutations can be inherited or acquired, and most probably occur in the intestinal
APC, β-catenin accumulates to high levels and translocates (moves) into the nucleus, binds to DNA, and activates the transcription of proto-oncogenes. These genes are normally important for stem cell renewal and differentiation, but when inappropriately expressed at high levels, they can
of all human genes are expressed in colorectal cancer, with just over 1% of having increased expression in colorectal cancer compared to other forms of cancer. Some genes are oncogenes: they are overexpressed in colorectal cancer. For example, genes encoding the proteins KRAS, RAF, and
and PI3K, which normally stimulate the cell to divide in response to growth factors, can acquire mutations that result in over-activation of cell proliferation. The chronological order of mutations is sometimes important. If a previous APC mutation occurred, a primary KRAS mutation often progresses to
the cell to divide in response to growth factors, can acquire mutations that result in over-activation of cell proliferation. The chronological order of mutations is sometimes important. If a previous APC mutation occurred, a primary KRAS mutation often progresses to cancer rather than a self-limiting
increased activity of MYC, a central player in colorectal cancer.Mismatch repair (MMR) deficient tumours are characterized by a relatively high amount of poly-nucleotide tandem repeats. This is caused by a deficiency in MMR proteins – which are typically caused by epigenetic silencing and or inherited
to progress.The polyp to cancer progression sequence is the classical model of colorectal cancer pathogenesis. The polyp to cancer sequence describes the phases of transition from benign tumours into colorectal cancer over many years. Central to the polyp to CRC sequence are gene mutations, epigenetic alterations and local
or "field" of epithelium that has been preconditioned (by what were largely unknown processes at the time) to predispose it towards development of cancer. Since then, the terms "field cancerization", "field carcinogenesis", "field defect", and "field effect
likely to arise.Field defects are important in progression to colon cancer.However, as pointed out by Rubin, "The vast majority of studies in cancer research has been done on well-defined tumors in vivo, or on discrete neoplastic foci in vitro. Yet there is
growth of apparently normal cells. Likewise, epigenetic alterations present in tumors may have occurred in pre-neoplastic field defects.An expanded view of field effect has been termed "etiologic field effect", which encompasses not only molecular and pathologic changes in pre-neoplastic cells but also
“passenger” mutations. The oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are well studied and are described above under Pathogenesis.In addition to epigenetic alteration of expression of miRNAs, other common types of epigenetic alterations in cancers that change gene expression levels include direct hypermethylation or hypomethylation of CpG islands of
” mutations. The oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are well studied and are described above under Pathogenesis.In addition to epigenetic alteration of expression of miRNAs, other common types of epigenetic alterations in cancers that change gene expression levels include direct hypermethylation or hypomethylation of CpG islands of protein-
to epigenetic alteration of expression of miRNAs, other common types of epigenetic alterations in cancers that change gene expression levels include direct hypermethylation or hypomethylation of CpG islands of protein-encoding genes and alterations in histones and chromosomal architecture that influence gene expression. As an example, 147 hypermethylations and
of expression of miRNAs, other common types of epigenetic alterations in cancers that change gene expression levels include direct hypermethylation or hypomethylation of CpG islands of protein-encoding genes and alterations in histones and chromosomal architecture that influence gene expression. As an example, 147 hypermethylations and 27 hypomethylations of
of protein-encoding genes and alterations in histones and chromosomal architecture that influence gene expression. As an example, 147 hypermethylations and 27 hypomethylations of protein coding genes were frequently associated with colorectal cancers. Of the hypermethylated genes, 10 were hypermethylated in 100% of colon cancers, and
hypermethylations and 27 hypomethylations of protein coding genes were frequently associated with colorectal cancers. Of the hypermethylated genes, 10 were hypermethylated in 100% of colon cancers, and many others were hypermethylated in more than 50% of colon cancers. In addition, 11 hypermethylations and 96 hypomethylations of
. Of the hypermethylated genes, 10 were hypermethylated in 100% of colon cancers, and many others were hypermethylated in more than 50% of colon cancers. In addition, 11 hypermethylations and 96 hypomethylations of miRNAs were also associated with colorectal cancers. Abnormal (aberrant) methylation occurs
of colon cancers, and many others were hypermethylated in more than 50% of colon cancers. In addition, 11 hypermethylations and 96 hypomethylations of miRNAs were also associated with colorectal cancers. Abnormal (aberrant) methylation occurs as a normal consequence of normal aging and the risk of colorectal
development of colorectal cancer. These findings may suggest a reason for age being associated with the increased risk of developing colorectal cancer.Epigenetic reductions of DNA repair enzyme expression may likely lead to the genomic and epigenomic instability characteristic of cancer. As summarized in the articles Carcinogenesis and Neoplasm,
is occasionally due to a mutation in a DNA repair gene, but is much more frequently due to epigenetic alterations that reduce or silence expression of DNA repair genes.Epigenetic alterations involved in the development of colorectal cancer may affect a person's response to chemotherapy.Colorectal cancer diagnosis is
to epigenetic alterations that reduce or silence expression of DNA repair genes.Epigenetic alterations involved in the development of colorectal cancer may affect a person's response to chemotherapy.Colorectal cancer diagnosis is performed by sampling of areas of the colon suspicious for possible tumor development, typically during colonoscopy or
the lesion. It is confirmed by microscopical examination of a tissue sample.A colorectal cancer is sometimes initially discovered on CT scan.Presence of metastases is determined by a CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis. Other potential imaging tests such as PET and MRI may be
used for rectal lesions to determine its local stage and to facilitate preoperative planning.The histopathologic characteristics of the tumor are reported from the analysis of tissue taken from a biopsy or surgery. A pathology report contains a description of the microscopical characteristics of the tumor tissue, including both tumor
both tumor cells and how the tumor invades into healthy tissues and finally if the tumor appears to be completely removed. The most common form of colon cancer is adenocarcinoma, constituting between 95% to 98% of all cases of colorectal cancer. Other, rarer types include lymphoma,
Immunohistochemistry may be used in uncertain cases.Staging of the cancer is based on both radiological and pathological findings. As with most other forms of cancer, tumor staging is based on the TNM system which considers how much the initial tumor has spread and the presence of metastases in lymph
most other forms of cancer, tumor staging is based on the TNM system which considers how much the initial tumor has spread and the presence of metastases in lymph nodes and more distant organs. The AJCC 8th edition was published in 2018.It has been estimated that about half of colorectal cancer
, consuming a diet high in fiber, and reducing smoking and alcohol consumption decrease the risk.Lifestyle risk factors with strong evidence include lack of exercise, cigarette smoking, alcohol, and obesity. The risk of colon cancer can be reduced by maintaining a normal body weight through a
consumption decrease the risk.Lifestyle risk factors with strong evidence include lack of exercise, cigarette smoking, alcohol, and obesity. The risk of colon cancer can be reduced by maintaining a normal body weight through a combination of sufficient exercise and eating a healthy diet.Starting in the
and retrospective observational studies. However, large scale prospective studies have failed to demonstrate a significant protective effect, and due to the multiple causes of cancer and the complexity of studying correlations between diet and health, it is uncertain whether any specific dietary interventions (outside of eating a healthy
studies have not borne this out, and status of the science remained unclear as of 2014. A 2019 review, however, found evidence of benefit from dietary fiber and whole grains. The World Cancer Research Fund listed the benefit of fiber for prevention of colorectal cancer as "probable
. A 2019 review, however, found evidence of benefit from dietary fiber and whole grains. The World Cancer Research Fund listed the benefit of fiber for prevention of colorectal cancer as "probable" as of 2017.Higher physical activity is recommended. Physical exercise is associated with a modest reduction
recommended. Physical exercise is associated with a modest reduction in colon but not rectal cancer risk. High levels of physical activity reduce the risk of colon cancer by about 21%. Sitting regularly for prolonged periods is associated with higher mortality from colon cancer. The risk is not negated
cancer in those at high risk. Aspirin is recommended in those who are 50 to 60 years old, do not have an increased risk of bleeding, and are at risk for cardiovascular disease to prevent colorectal cancer. It is not recommended in those at average risk.There is
for calcium supplementation, but it is not sufficient to make a recommendation. Vitamin D intake and blood levels are associated with a lower risk of colon cancer.As more than 80% of colorectal cancers arise from adenomatous polyps, screening for this cancer is effective for both early detection
than 80% of colorectal cancers arise from adenomatous polyps, screening for this cancer is effective for both early detection and for prevention. Diagnosis of cases of colorectal cancer through screening tends to occur 2–3 years before diagnosis of cases with symptoms. Any polyps that are detected can be removed
cancer is effective for both early detection and for prevention. Diagnosis of cases of colorectal cancer through screening tends to occur 2–3 years before diagnosis of cases with symptoms. Any polyps that are detected can be removed, usually by colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, and thus prevent them from turning into
occult blood testing, and flexible sigmoidoscopy. Of the three, only sigmoidoscopy cannot screen the right side of the colon where 42% of cancers are found. Flexible sigmoidoscopy, however, has the best evidence for decreasing the risk of death from any cause.Fecal occult blood
right side of the colon where 42% of cancers are found. Flexible sigmoidoscopy, however, has the best evidence for decreasing the risk of death from any cause.Fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) of the stool is typically recommended every two years and can be either guaiac
For people with average risk who have had a high-quality colonoscopy with normal results, the American Gastroenterological Association does not recommend any type of screening in the 10 years following the colonoscopy. For people over 75 or those with a life expectancy of less than 10 years, screening
national colorectal screening programs which offer FOBT screening for all adults within a certain age group, typically starting between ages 50 to 60. Examples of countries with organised screening include the United Kingdom, Australia,  the Netherlands, Hong Kong and Taiwan.The treatment of colorectal cancer can
treatment of colorectal cancer can be aimed at cure or palliation. The decision on which aim to adopt depends on various factors, including the person's health and preferences, as well as the stage of the tumor. When colorectal cancer is caught early, surgery can be curative. However
of colorectal cancer can be aimed at cure or palliation. The decision on which aim to adopt depends on various factors, including the person's health and preferences, as well as the stage of the tumor. When colorectal cancer is caught early, surgery can be curative. However
as comfortable as possible.If the cancer is found at a very early stage, it may be removed during a colonoscopy using a variety of techniques including EMR and ESD. For people with localized cancer, the preferred treatment is complete surgical removal with adequate margins, with the attempt
people with localized cancer, the preferred treatment is complete surgical removal with adequate margins, with the attempt of achieving a cure. The procedure of choice is a partial colectomy (or proctocolectomy for rectal lesions) where the affected part of the colon or rectum is removed along with parts
may also be removed. Sometimes chemotherapy is used before surgery to shrink the cancer before attempting to remove it. The two most common sites of recurrence of colorectal cancer are the liver and lungs.In the “Surgical Resection of Liver Metastases From Colorectal Carcinoma Survival According to Radical Liver
attempting to remove it. The two most common sites of recurrence of colorectal cancer are the liver and lungs.In the “Surgical Resection of Liver Metastases From Colorectal Carcinoma Survival According to Radical Liver Resection and to Prognostic Factors“ the Autors stated that the surgical resection of the liver
), and is potentially the only curative treatment. Their results shows that if radical (R0) liver resection was achieved, the number of metastases, their location (unilobar vs bilobar), and the occurrence of extrahepatic metastases did not affect 3 year survival.In both cancer
cancer of the colon and rectum, chemotherapy may be used in addition to surgery in certain cases. The decision to add chemotherapy in management of colon and rectal cancer depends on the stage of the disease.In Stage I colon cancer, no chemotherapy is offered, and surgery is
the stage of the disease.In Stage I colon cancer, no chemotherapy is offered, and surgery is the definitive treatment. The role of chemotherapy in Stage II colon cancer is debatable, and is usually not offered unless risk factors such as T4 tumor, undifferentiated tumor, vascular
abnormalities of the mismatch repair genes do not benefit from chemotherapy. For stage III and Stage IV colon cancer, chemotherapy is an integral part of treatment.If cancer has spread to the lymph nodes or distant organs, which is the case with stage III and stage IV colon cancer
cancer respectively, adding chemotherapy agents fluorouracil, capecitabine or oxaliplatin increases life expectancy. If the lymph nodes do not contain cancer, the benefits of chemotherapy are controversial. If the cancer is widely metastatic or unresectable, treatment is then palliative. Typically in this setting, a number of
CRC are CAPOX, FOLFOX, FOLFOXIRI, and FOLFIRI. Antiangiogenic drugs such as bevacizumab are often added in first line therapy. Another class of drugs used in the second line setting are epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors, of which the two FDA approved ones are cetuximab and panitumumab.
of which the two FDA approved ones are cetuximab and panitumumab.The primary difference in the approach to low stage rectal cancer is the incorporation of radiation therapy. Often, it is used in conjunction with chemotherapy in a neoadjuvant fashion to enable surgical resection, so that ultimately a colostomy
to stage IV colon cancer.Stage IV colorectal cancer due to peritoneal carcinomatosis can be treated using HIPEC in some people.While a combination of radiation and chemotherapy may be useful for rectal cancer, for some people requiring treatment, chemoradiotherapy can increase acute treatment-related toxicity, and
and has not been shown to improve survival rates compared to radiotherapy alone, although it is associated with less local recurrence.  The use of radiotherapy in colon cancer is not routine due to the sensitivity of the bowels to radiation. As with chemotherapy, radiotherapy can be used as
is not possible radiation therapy has been suggested to be an effective treatment against CRC pulmonary metastases, which are developed by 10-15% of people with CRC.Immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors has been found to be useful for a type of colorectal cancer with mismatch repair deficiency and microsatellite instability
recommended for any person who has advanced colon cancer or who has significant symptoms.Involvement of palliative care may be beneficial to improve the quality of life for both the person and his or her family, by improving symptoms, anxiety and preventing admissions to the hospital.In people with
care can consist of procedures that relieve symptoms or complications from the cancer but do not attempt to cure the underlying cancer, thereby improving quality of life. Surgical options may include non-curative surgical removal of some of the cancer tissue, bypassing part of the intestines, or stent
and intestinal obstruction. Non-operative methods of symptomatic treatment include radiation therapy to decrease tumor size as well as pain medications.The aims of follow-up are to diagnose, in the earliest possible stage, any metastasis or tumors that develop later, but did not originate from
originate from the original cancer (metachronous lesions).The U.S. National Comprehensive Cancer Network and American Society of Clinical Oncology provide guidelines for the follow-up of colon cancer. A medical history and physical examination are recommended every 3 to 6 months for 2 years, then every 6 months for 5
CT-scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis can be considered annually for the first 3 years for people who are at high risk of recurrence (for example, those who had poorly differentiated tumors or venous or lymphatic invasion) and are candidates for curative surgery (with the
cancer survivors. In epidemiological studies, exercise may decrease colorectal cancer-specific mortality and all-cause mortality. Results for the specific amounts of exercise needed to observe a benefit were conflicting. These differences may reflect differences in tumour biology and expression of biomarkers. Patients with tumors that
. Results for the specific amounts of exercise needed to observe a benefit were conflicting. These differences may reflect differences in tumour biology and expression of biomarkers. Patients with tumors that lacked CTNNB1 expression (β-catenin), involved in Wnt signalling pathway, required more than 18 Metabolic
β-catenin), involved in Wnt signalling pathway, required more than 18 Metabolic equivalent (MET) hours per week, a measure of exercise, to observe a reduction in colorectal cancer mortality. The mechanism of how exercise benefits survival may be involved in immune surveillance and inflammation
. Oxidative balance may be another possible mechanism for benefits observed. A significant decrease in 8-oxo-dG was found in the urine of people who underwent 2 weeks of moderate exercise after primary therapy. Other possible mechanisms may involve metabolic hormone and sex-steroid hormones, although
after primary therapy. Other possible mechanisms may involve metabolic hormone and sex-steroid hormones, although these pathways may be involved in other types of cancersAnother potential biomarker may be p27. Survivors with tumors that expressed p27 and performed greater and equal to 18 MET hours per week were found
those with less than 18 MET hours per week. Survivors without p27 expression who exercised were shown to have worse outcomes. The constitutive activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway may explain the loss of p27 and excess energy balance may up-regulate p27 to stop cancer cells from
without p27 expression who exercised were shown to have worse outcomes. The constitutive activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway may explain the loss of p27 and excess energy balance may up-regulate p27 to stop cancer cells from dividing.Fewer than 600 genes are linked to outcomes in
is 5% for stage I cancers, 12% in stage II and 33% in stage III. However, depending on the number of risk factors it ranges from 9–22% in stage II and 17–44% in stage III.In Europe the five-year survival rate for colorectal cancer
in stage III.In Europe the five-year survival rate for colorectal cancer is less than 60%. In the developed world about a third of people who get the disease die from it.Survival is directly related to detection and the type of cancer involved, but overall is poor
In the developed world about a third of people who get the disease die from it.Survival is directly related to detection and the type of cancer involved, but overall is poor for symptomatic cancers, as they are typically quite advanced. Survival rates for early stage detection are about
cancer every year resulting in about 715,000 deaths as of 2010 up from 490,000 in 1990.As of 2012, it is the second most common cause of cancer in women (9.2% of diagnoses) and the third most common in men (10.0%) with it being the fourth most
deaths as of 2010 up from 490,000 in 1990.As of 2012, it is the second most common cause of cancer in women (9.2% of diagnoses) and the third most common in men (10.0%) with it being the fourth most common cause of cancer death after lung
women (9.2% of diagnoses) and the third most common in men (10.0%) with it being the fourth most common cause of cancer death after lung, stomach, and liver cancer. It is more common in developed than developing countries. Globally incidences vary 10-
, New Zealand, Europe and the US and lowest rates in Africa and South-Central Asia.Colorectal cancer is the second highest cause of cancer occurrence and death for men and women in the United States combined. An estimated 141,210 cases were diagnosed in 2011.Based on rates from 2007
their lifetime. From 2005 to 2009, the median age at diagnosis for cancer of the colon and rectum in the US was 69 years of age. Approximately 0.1% were diagnosed under age 20; 1.1% between 20 and 34; 4.0% between 35 and 44; 13.4
% between 55 and 64; 24.0% between 65 and 74; 25.0% between 75 and 84; and 12.0% 85+ years of age. Rates are higher among males (54 per 100,000 c.f. 40 per 100,000 for females).In the UK about 41,000 people a year get
Australia will develop colorectal cancer before the age of 75; one in 10 men and one in 15 women will develop it by 85 years of age.Rectal cancer has been diagnosed in an Ancient Egyptian mummy who had lived in the Dakhleh Oasis during the Ptolemaic period.In the
and progression of colorectal cancer through several mechanisms such as antioxidant activity, immunomodulation, promoting programmed cell death, antiproliferative effects, and epigenetic modification of cancer cells.Mouse models of colorectal and intestinal cancer have been developed and are used in research.The Cancer Genome AtlasThe Colorectal Cancer Atlas

and HPV infection. Risk from UV radiation is related to total exposure, rather than early exposure. Tanning beds are becoming another common source of ultraviolet radiation. Risk is also elevated in certain genetic skin disorders, such as xeroderma pigmentosum and certain forms of epidermolysis bullosa. It begins
are becoming another common source of ultraviolet radiation. Risk is also elevated in certain genetic skin disorders, such as xeroderma pigmentosum and certain forms of epidermolysis bullosa. It begins from squamous cells found within the skin. Diagnosis is often based on skin examination and confirmed by tissue biopsy.
of FGFR2, a subset of the Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) immunoglobin family, has a critical role to play in the progression of cSCC cells. Mutation in the Tpl2 gene causes the overexpression of FGFR2, which activates mTORC1 and AKT pathways in both primary and metastatic cSCC
by using FGFR pan-inhibitor, AZD4547, could cell migration and cell proliferation on cSCC be attenuatedDecreasing exposure to ultraviolet radiation and the use of sunscreen appear to be effective methods of preventing squamous-cell skin cancer. Treatment is typically by surgical removal. This can be by simple
about 2.2 million people have cSCC at any given time. It makes up about 20% of all skin cancer cases. About 12% of males and 7% of females in the United States developed cSCC at some point in time. While prognosis is usually good, if distant
cSCC at any given time. It makes up about 20% of all skin cancer cases. About 12% of males and 7% of females in the United States developed cSCC at some point in time. While prognosis is usually good, if distant spread occurs five-year
invades the underlying tissueThe tumor commonly presents on sun-exposed areas (e.g. back of the hand, scalp, lip, and superior surface of pinna)On the lip, the tumor forms a small ulcer, which fails to heal and bleeds intermittentlyEvidence of chronic skin photodamage, such as multiple
keratoses (solar keratoses)The tumor grows relatively slowlyUnlike basal-cell carcinoma (BCC), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has a higher risk of metastasis.Risk of metastasis is higher in SCC arising in scars, on the lower lips or mucosa, and occurring in immunosuppressed patients.
tumor grows relatively slowlyUnlike basal-cell carcinoma (BCC), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has a higher risk of metastasis.Risk of metastasis is higher in SCC arising in scars, on the lower lips or mucosa, and occurring in immunosuppressed patients.Squamous cell carcinoma is
and immunosuppression are risk factors for SCC of the skin, with chronic sun exposure being the strongest environmental risk factor. There is a risk of metastasis starting more than 10 years after diagnosable appearance of squamous cell carcinoma, but the risk is low, though much higher than with basal
their more obvious nature and growth rates, they represent 90% of all head and neck cancers that are initially presented.The vast majority of SCCs are those of the skin, and are often the result of ultraviolet exposure. SCCs usually occur on portions of the body commonly exposed
all head and neck cancers that are initially presented.The vast majority of SCCs are those of the skin, and are often the result of ultraviolet exposure. SCCs usually occur on portions of the body commonly exposed to the Sun; the face, ears, neck, hands,
growing bump that may have a rough, scaly surface and flat reddish patches.Unlike basal-cell carcinomas, SCCs carry a higher risk of metastasis, and may spread to the regional lymph nodes,Erythroplasia of Queyrat (SCC in situ of the glans or prepuce in males,
thickness of the epidermis, with the keratinocytes demonstrating intense mitotic activity, pleomorphism, and greatly enlarged nuclei. They will also show a loss of maturity and polarity, giving the epidermis a disordered or “windblown” appearance.Two types of multinucleated cells may be seen: the first
Cochin.In invasive SCC, tumor cells infiltrate through the basement membrane. The infiltrate can be somewhat difficult to detect in the early stages of invasion: however, additional indicators such as full thickness epidermal atypia and the involvement of hair follicles can be used to facilitate the diagnosis.
can be somewhat difficult to detect in the early stages of invasion: however, additional indicators such as full thickness epidermal atypia and the involvement of hair follicles can be used to facilitate the diagnosis. Later stages of invasion are characterized by the formation of nests of atypical tumor cells in
however, additional indicators such as full thickness epidermal atypia and the involvement of hair follicles can be used to facilitate the diagnosis. Later stages of invasion are characterized by the formation of nests of atypical tumor cells in the dermis, often with a corresponding inflammatory infiltrate.												Appropriate sun
thickness epidermal atypia and the involvement of hair follicles can be used to facilitate the diagnosis. Later stages of invasion are characterized by the formation of nests of atypical tumor cells in the dermis, often with a corresponding inflammatory infiltrate.												Appropriate sun-protective clothing, use of broad
(UVA/UVB) sunscreen with at least SPF 50, and avoidance of intense sun exposure may prevent skin cancer. A 2016 review of sunscreen for preventing squamous cell skin cancer found insufficient evidence to demonstrate whether it was effective.Most squamous cell carcinomas are removed with surgery.
little evidence comparing the effectiveness of different treatments for non-metastatic SCC of the skin.Mohs surgery is frequently utilized; considered the treatment of choice for squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, physicians have also utilized the method for the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the mouth,
serves a painless possibility to treat in particular but not only difficult to operate areas like the earlobes or genitals. An example of this kind of therapy is the High dose brachytherapy Rhenium-SCT which makes use of the beta rays emitting property of Rhenium-188. The radiation source is enclosed
to complex locations and minimize radiation to healthy tissue.After removal of the cancer, closure of the skin for patients with a decreased amount of skin laxity involves a split-thickness skin graft. A donor site is chosen and enough skin is removed so that the donor site can
site is chosen and enough skin is removed so that the donor site can heal on its own. Only the epidermis and a partial amount of dermis is taken from the donor site which allows the donor site to heal. Skin can be harvested using either a mechanical dermatome or Humby
excision. A meta-analysis showed evidence that PDT is more effective than cryotherapy and has better cosmetic outcomes. There is generally a lack of evidence comparing the effectiveness of all treatment options.High-risk squamous cell carcinoma, as defined by those occurring around the eye, ear
node dissection with Marjolin's ulcers is not proven.RadiotherapyAdjuvant therapy may be considered in those with high-risk SCC even in the absence of evidence for local mestastasis. Imiquimod (Aldara) has been used with success for squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the skin and the penis
.). Generally, the long-term outcome is positive, as less than 4% of Squamous cell carcinoma cases are at risk of metastasis. When it does metastasize, the most common involved organs are the lungs, brain, bone and other skin locations.One study
are the lungs, brain, bone and other skin locations.One study found squamous cell carcinoma of the penis had a much greater rate of mortality than some other forms of squamous cell carcinoma, that is, about 23%, although this relatively high mortality rate may be associated
submit to a possibly scarring operation upon the genitalia. Squamous cell carcinoma occurring in the organ transplant population is also associated with a higher risk of mortality.The incidence of squamous cell carcinoma continues to rise around the world. A recent study estimated that there are between 180,000 and 400,000

exam, and medical imaging.Endometrial cancer can often be cured while uterine sarcoma typically is harder to treat. Treatment may include a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, hormone therapy, and targeted therapy. Just over 80% of people survive more than 5 years following
treat. Treatment may include a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, hormone therapy, and targeted therapy. Just over 80% of people survive more than 5 years following diagnosis.In 2015 about 3.8 million people were affected globally and it resulted in 90,000 deaths. Endometrial
though hormone imbalance is speculated as a risk factor. Estrogen receptors, known to be present on the surfaces of the cells of this type of cancer, are thought to interact with the hormone causing increased cell growth, which can then result in cancer. The exact mechanism of how
The exact mechanism of how this occurs is not understood.The terms uterine cancer and womb cancer may refer to any of several different types of cancer which occur in the uterus, namely:Endometrial cancer:Endometrial carcinomas originate from cells in the glands of the endometrium (uterine lining
sarcomas:  sarcomas of the myometrium, or muscular layer of the uterus, are most commonly leiomyosarcomas.Uterine cancer effects approximately 3.1% of women during their lifetime. Uterine cancer resulted in 45,000 deaths worldwide in 1990, with this number increasing to 58,000 deaths in 2010. North
Asia, Southern Europe, Australia and South America have moderate rates, with the lowest rates in Africa and Eastern Asia. About 81% of women with uterine cancer surviving for five years. This rate is higher with more localized cancer at 95% survival rate for five years and
in women in the UK (around 8,500 women were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and it is the tenth most common cause of cancer death in women (around 2,000 people died in 2012).In the United States, uterine cancer is the most commonly diagnosed invasive cancer of the
2,000 people died in 2012).In the United States, uterine cancer is the most commonly diagnosed invasive cancer of the female reproductive system. The number of women diagnosed with uterine cancer has been steadily increasing, with 35,040 women diagnosed in 1999 and 56,808 diagnosed in 2016. The age-adjusted
27.3 per 100,000 in 2016. The incidence of uterine cancer increased even more in 2019, with an approximated 61,880 new cases.The rates of incidence and death for uterine cancer differ depending on race. The incidence is highest for white women, with 28.1 new cases per 100,000 persons

and spindle cell/sclerosing rhabdomyosarcoma. Embryonal, and alveolar are the main groups, and these types are the most common soft tissue sarcomas of childhood and adolescence. The pleomorphic type is usually found in adults.It is generally considered to be a disease of childhood, as the
common soft tissue sarcomas of childhood and adolescence. The pleomorphic type is usually found in adults.It is generally considered to be a disease of childhood, as the vast majority of cases occur in those below the age of 18. It is commonly described as one of the small
adolescence. The pleomorphic type is usually found in adults.It is generally considered to be a disease of childhood, as the vast majority of cases occur in those below the age of 18. It is commonly described as one of the small-blue-round-cell tumors
cases occur in those below the age of 18. It is commonly described as one of the small-blue-round-cell tumors of childhood due to its appearance on an H&E stain. Despite being relatively rare, it accounts for approximately 40% of all recorded soft tissue
abnormalities. Signs and symptoms vary according to tumor site, and prognosis is closely tied to the location of the primary tumor. Common sites of metastasis include the lungs, bone marrow, and bones. There are many classification systems for RMS and a variety of defined histological types.
are many classification systems for RMS and a variety of defined histological types. Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common type and comprises about 60% of cases.Outcomes vary considerably, with 5 years survival rates between 35% and 95% depending on the type of RMS involved, so
is often difficult due to the heterogeneity of RMS tumors and a lack of strong genetic markers of the disease. Treatment usually involves a combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation. Sixty percent to 70% of newly diagnosed patients with nonmetastatic disease can be cured using this combined approach
of newly diagnosed patients with nonmetastatic disease can be cured using this combined approach to therapy. Despite aggressive multimodality treatment, less than 20% of patients with metastatic RMS are able to be cured of their disease. Given the difficulty in diagnosing rhabdomyosarcoma, definitive classification of subtypes has proven
than 20% of patients with metastatic RMS are able to be cured of their disease. Given the difficulty in diagnosing rhabdomyosarcoma, definitive classification of subtypes has proven difficult. As a result, classification systems vary by institute and organization. However, rhabdomyosarcoma in the 2020 WHO classification is
alveolar, pleomorphic, and spindle cell/sclerosing.Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) is the most common histological variant, comprising approximately 60–70% of childhood cases. It is most common in children 0–4 years old, with a maximum reported incidence of 4 cases per 1 million children.
arise in the retroperitoneum and mediastinum can become quite large before producing signs and symptoms. Parameningeal tumors may present with cranial nerve dysfunction, symptoms of sinusitis, ear discharge, headaches, and facial pain. Orbital tumors often present with orbital swelling and proptosis. Extremity tumors generally present as
often present with orbital swelling and proptosis. Extremity tumors generally present as a rapidly enlarging, firm mass in the relevant tissue. The cancer's prevalence in the head, face, and neck will often allow for earlier signs of the disease simply due to the obvious nature of tumors
cancer's prevalence in the head, face, and neck will often allow for earlier signs of the disease simply due to the obvious nature of tumors in these locations. Despite the varying presentation and typically aggressive nature of the disease, RMS has the potential to be diagnosed and treated
typically aggressive nature of the disease, RMS has the potential to be diagnosed and treated early. The fourth IRSG study found that 23% of patients were diagnosed in time for a complete resection of their cancer, and 15% had resection with only minimal remnants of the diseased cells
, q15). Both involve the translocation of a DNA binding domain of either PAX3 or PAX7, a member of the Paired Box family of transcription factors, to a transactivation site on FOXO1 (previously known as FKHR), a member of the forkhead/HNF-3 transcription factor family
RMS. The t(2;13) translocation can result in the PAX3-FKHR fusion product, which is indicative of classic cystic ARMS.  Cases of FP-RMS are associated with a poorer prognosis than fusion-negative RMS.The fusion protein presents a potential therapeutic target, and in recent years
-RMS subtypes were especially sensitive to inhibitors (such as JQ1) of a super enhancer bound protein BRD4.Embryonal RMS usually presents with a loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the short arm of chromosome 11 (p11,15.5). This region is associated with multiple oncogenes, and the potential
such as JQ1) of a super enhancer bound protein BRD4.Embryonal RMS usually presents with a loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the short arm of chromosome 11 (p11,15.5). This region is associated with multiple oncogenes, and the potential loss-of-function of this region is
of a tumor suppressor. However, the specific consequences of this LOH at (p11,15.5) have yet to be determined. The short arm of chromosome 11 is also the site of the insulin-like growth factor 2 gene (IGF-2), which is often over-expressed in
of the insulin-like growth factor 2 gene (IGF-2), which is often over-expressed in RMS.The loss-of-function of tumor suppressor p53 is associated with many cancers including rhabdomyosarcoma, and approximately 50% of RMS cases have been shown to carry some form of
of tumor suppressor p53 is associated with many cancers including rhabdomyosarcoma, and approximately 50% of RMS cases have been shown to carry some form of mutation to the P53 gene. Other oncogenes often associated with rhabdomyosarcoma, albeit with less frequency, include NMYC, NRAS, KRAS, P16
the MAP kinase pathway known as a MEK inhibitor.Rhabdomyosarcoma is often difficult to diagnose due to its similarities to other cancers and varying levels of differentiation. It is loosely classified as one of the small-blue-round-cell tumors due to its appearance on an H&E stain
The alveolar type of RMS tends to have stronger muscle-specific protein staining. Electron microscopy may also aid in diagnosis, with the presence of actin and myosin or Z bands pointing to a positive diagnosis of RMS. Classification into types and subtypes is accomplished through further analysis of cellular
pointing to a positive diagnosis of RMS. Classification into types and subtypes is accomplished through further analysis of cellular morphology (alveolar spacings, presence of cambium layer, aneuploidy, etc.) as well as genetic sequencing of tumor cells. Some genetic markers, such as the PAX3-
accomplished through further analysis of cellular morphology (alveolar spacings, presence of cambium layer, aneuploidy, etc.) as well as genetic sequencing of tumor cells. Some genetic markers, such as the PAX3-FKHR fusion gene expression in alveolar RMS, can aid in diagnosis. Open
the IRSG. This system accounts for tumor size (> or <5 cm), lymph node involvement, tumor site, and presence of metastasis. It grades on a scale of 1 to 4 based on these criteria. In addition, patients are sorted by clinical group (
four risk categories based on tumor grade and clinical group, and these risk categories have been shown to be highly predictive of outcome.Treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma is a multidisciplinary practice involving the use of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and possibly immunotherapy. Surgery is generally the first step in
group, and these risk categories have been shown to be highly predictive of outcome.Treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma is a multidisciplinary practice involving the use of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and possibly immunotherapy. Surgery is generally the first step in a combined therapeutic approach. Resectability varies depending on
Resectability varies depending on tumor site, and RMS often presents in sites that don't allow for full surgical resection without significant morbidity and loss of function. Less than 20% of RMS tumors are fully resected with negative margins. Rhabdomyosarcomas are highly chemosensitive, with approximately 80% of
of function. Less than 20% of RMS tumors are fully resected with negative margins. Rhabdomyosarcomas are highly chemosensitive, with approximately 80% of cases responding to chemotherapy. In fact, multi-agent chemotherapy is indicated for all patients with rhabdomyosarcoma. Before the use of adjuvant and
solely by surgical means had a survival rate of <20%. Modern survival rates with adjuvant therapy are approximately 60–70%.There are two main methods of chemotherapy treatment for RMS. There is the VAC regimen, consisting of vincristine, actinomycin D, and cyclophosphamide, and the IVA regimen,
cycles depending on the staging of the disease and other therapies used.  Other drug and therapy combinations may also show additional benefit. Addition of doxorubicin and cisplatin to the VAC regimen was shown to increase survival rates of patients with alveolar-type, early-stage RMS in IRS
Other drug and therapy combinations may also show additional benefit. Addition of doxorubicin and cisplatin to the VAC regimen was shown to increase survival rates of patients with alveolar-type, early-stage RMS in IRS study III, and this same addition improved survival rates and doubled bladder salvage
no evidence to support the use of high-dose chemotherapy as a standard therapy.Radiation therapy, which kill cancer cells with focused doses of radiation, is often indicated in the treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma, and the exclusion of this treatment from disease management has been shown to increase recurrence
dose chemotherapy as a standard therapy.Radiation therapy, which kill cancer cells with focused doses of radiation, is often indicated in the treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma, and the exclusion of this treatment from disease management has been shown to increase recurrence rates. Radiation therapy is used when resecting the
. Generally, in any case where a lack of complete resection is suspected, radiation therapy is indicated. Administration is usually following 6–12 weeks of chemotherapy if tumor cells are still present. The exception to this schedule is the presence of parameningeal tumors that have invaded the brain, spinal
from this new, immune-based approach.Prognosis in rhabdomyosarcoma patients has been shown to be dependent on age, tumor site, resectability of tumor, tumor size, regional lymph node involvement, presence of metastasis, site and extent of metastasis, and biological and histopathological characteristics of
patients has been shown to be dependent on age, tumor site, resectability of tumor, tumor size, regional lymph node involvement, presence of metastasis, site and extent of metastasis, and biological and histopathological characteristics of the tumor cells. Survival after recurrence is poor, and new
dependent on age, tumor site, resectability of tumor, tumor size, regional lymph node involvement, presence of metastasis, site and extent of metastasis, and biological and histopathological characteristics of the tumor cells. Survival after recurrence is poor, and new salvage therapy strategies are needed Rhabdomyosarcoma
at approximately 4.5 case per 1 million children/adolescents with approximately 250 new cases in the United States each year. With the vast majority of cases of RMS occurring in children or adolescents, two-thirds of reported cases occur in youths under the age of 10. RMS also
syndrome, Li–Fraumeni syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome, and Costello syndrome. It has also been associated with parental use of cocaine and marijuana.Rhabdomyosarcoma was first described by Weber, a German physician, in 1845, but it wasn't until the paper by
, in 1845, but it wasn't until the paper by Arthur Stout in 1946 that RMS was formally classified. The first thirty years of investigation were conducted by the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group (IRSG), an independent National Cancer Institute (NCI)-funded cooperative that has become a part
IRSG), an independent National Cancer Institute (NCI)-funded cooperative that has become a part of the Children's Oncology Group.Cancer stem cells of rhabdomyosarcoma have been identified and fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 has been suggested as their marker. Preclinical animal studies that try to use conditionally replicating
is a rare medical condition in which benign tumors (papilloma) form along the aerodigestive tract. There are two variants based on the age of onset: juvenile and adult laryngeal papillomatosis. The tumors are caused by human papillomavirus (HPV) infection of the throat. The tumors may
lead to narrowing of the airway, which may cause vocal changes or airway obstruction. Laryngeal papillomatosis is initially diagnosed through indirect laryngoscopy upon observation of growths on the larynx and can be confirmed through a biopsy. Treatment for laryngeal papillomatosis aims to remove the papillomas and limit their recurrence.
quality. More specifically, hoarseness is observed. As a consequence of the narrowing of the laryngeal or tracheal parts of the airway, shortness of breath, chronic cough and stridor (i.e. noisy breathing which can sound like a whistle or a snore), can be present. As
genotypes 6 and 11 although genotypes 16, 18, 31, and 33 have also been implicated. HPV-11 is associated with more aggressive forms of papillomatosis, which may involve more distal parts of the tracheobronchial tree. The mode of viral inoculation is hypothesized to vary according to age of
of papillomatosis, which may involve more distal parts of the tracheobronchial tree. The mode of viral inoculation is hypothesized to vary according to age of disease onset. The presence of HPV in the respiratory tract does not necessarily result in the development of laryngeal papillomatosis. Other factors that could
-Barr virus).The disease is typically separated into two forms, juvenile and adult papillomatosis, based on whether it develops before or after 20 years of age. The juvenile form is generally transmitted through contact with a mother's infected vaginal canal during childbirth. Less is known about transmission in
during childbirth. Less is known about transmission in the adult form of this disease, though oral sex has been implicated as a potential mode of transmission. However, it is uncertain whether oral sex would directly transmit the virus or activate the dormant virus that was transmitted at childbirth.
a child born of an infected mother developing laryngeal papillomatosis is low (between 1 in 231 to 1 in 400), even if the mother's infection is active. Risk factors for a higher likelihood of transmission at childbirth include the first birth, vaginal birth, and teenage mother.
child born of an infected mother developing laryngeal papillomatosis is low (between 1 in 231 to 1 in 400), even if the mother's infection is active. Risk factors for a higher likelihood of transmission at childbirth include the first birth, vaginal birth, and teenage mother.
(between 1 in 231 to 1 in 400), even if the mother's infection is active. Risk factors for a higher likelihood of transmission at childbirth include the first birth, vaginal birth, and teenage mother.There are three big risk factors that contribute to the acquirement
, through the nose and into the throat to visualize the larynx from above. This procedure is also called flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy.The appearance of papillomas has been described as multiple or rarely, single, white growths with a lumpy texture similar to cauliflower. Papillomas usually present in the
growth. Biopsy samples are collected under general anesthesia, either through direct laryngoscopy or fiberoptic bronchoscopy.Little is known in terms of effective means of prevention, if the mother is infected with HPV.  (HPV vaccination can prevent these infections in the mother, and thereby eliminate the
prevent these infections in the mother, and thereby eliminate the possibility of the virus infecting the baby.)  Due to the low likelihood of transmission even from an infected mother, it is not recommended to expose the mother and child to the additional risks of caesarean section to prevent
of laryngeal papillomatosis often triggers more aggressive relapses than the adult form. Between recurrences, voice therapy may be used to restore or maintain the person's voice function.The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues
laryngeal papillomatosis often triggers more aggressive relapses than the adult form. Between recurrences, voice therapy may be used to restore or maintain the person's voice function.The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues
than the adult form. Between recurrences, voice therapy may be used to restore or maintain the person's voice function.The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues and the individual's voice, as
.The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues and the individual's voice, as well as ensure that the airway remains unobstructed by the disease. However, surgery does not prevent recurrences, and can lead
The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues and the individual's voice, as well as ensure that the airway remains unobstructed by the disease. However, surgery does not prevent recurrences, and can lead
a number of serious complications. Laser technology, and carbon dioxide laser surgery in particular, has been used since the 1970s for the removal of papillomas; however, laser surgery is not without its risks, and has been associated with a higher occurrence of respiratory tract burns, stenosis
debulking surgery failures have led to airways being compromised. The tracheotomies use breathing tubes to reroute air around the affected area, thereby restoring the person's breathing function. Although this intervention is usually temporary, some people must use the tube indefinitely. This method should be avoided if at all
surgery failures have led to airways being compromised. The tracheotomies use breathing tubes to reroute air around the affected area, thereby restoring the person's breathing function. Although this intervention is usually temporary, some people must use the tube indefinitely. This method should be avoided if at all
is a tool that can suction tissue into a blade, which then cuts the tissue. Microdebriders are gradually replacing laser technology as the treatment of choice for laryngeal papillomatosis, due to their ability to selectively suction papillomas while relatively sparing unaffected tissue. In addition to the lower risk of
of choice for laryngeal papillomatosis, due to their ability to selectively suction papillomas while relatively sparing unaffected tissue. In addition to the lower risk of complications, microdebrider surgery also is reportedly less expensive, less time-consuming, and more likely to give the person a better voice quality
time-consuming, and more likely to give the person a better voice quality than the traditional laser surgery approaches.For about 20% of people, surgery is not sufficient to control their laryngeal papillomatosis, and additional nonsurgical and/or medical treatments are necessary. As of 2015, these
HPV vaccines can be used therapeutically (after the infection has occurred).  For most patients, the HPV vaccine significantly increases the length of time needed between surgeries.The evolution of laryngeal papillomatosis is highly unpredictable and is characterized by modulation of its severity and variable rate of progression
length of time needed between surgeries.The evolution of laryngeal papillomatosis is highly unpredictable and is characterized by modulation of its severity and variable rate of progression across individuals. While instances of total recovery are observed, the condition is often persistent and lesions can reappear even after treatment. Factors
extralaryngeal sites. In more aggressive cases, infection of the lungs can occur with progressive airway obstruction. Although rare (less than 1% of people with laryngeal papillomatosis), transformation from a benign form to a malignant form is also observed. Death can result from these complications (
Death can result from these complications (morbidity rate is around 1-2%).Laryngeal papillomatosis is a rare disease with a bimodal distribution based on age of incidence. The incidence, or number of new cases, of laryngeal papillomatosis cases is at approximately 4.3 cases per 100 000 children and 1.8
children peaks before the age of 5, though the term juvenile papillomatosis refers to all cases occurring before the age of 20. The incidence of adult laryngeal papillomatosis, which has an onset after the age of 20, peaks between the ages of 20 and 40. While there are
as socioeconomic status, such that higher rates are observed in groups having a lower socioeconomic status.Because of its relative commonness and the cost of treatments, more money is spent on treating RRP than on any other benign airway tumor.As of 2015 use of the measles-mumps
on treating RRP than on any other benign airway tumor.As of 2015 use of the measles-mumps-rubella vaccine to reduce rate of recurrences had been investigated, but had not yielded significant results.List of cutaneous conditions
children may recur. Gene therapy to treat vaginal cancer is currently in clinical trials.Carcinoma of the vagina occurs in less than 2% of women with pelvic malignant tumors. Squamous carcinoma is the most common type of vaginal cancer. The human papilloma virus (HPV) is strongly
not cause signs or symptoms early on. When vaginal cancer does cause symptoms, they may include: Vaginal discharge or abnormal bleedingUnusually heavy flow of bloodBleeding after menopauseBleeding between periods; or any otherBleeding that is longer than normalBlood in the stool or urineFrequent or urgent need to urinateFeeling constipatedpain during
lining of the vagina. Adenocarcinoma is more likely to spread to the lungs and lymph nodes.Clear cell adenocarcinoma occurs in a small percentage of women (termed "DES-Daughters") born between 1938 and 1973 (later outside the United States) that were exposed to the
complications. Daughters exposed to DES in utero may also have an increased risk of moderate/severe cervical squamous cell dysplasia and an increased risk of breast cancer. Approximately one in 1,000 (0.1%) DES Daughters will be diagnosed with clear cell adenocarcinoma. The risk is virtually non
. In early stages of vaginal cancer, surgery also has some benefit. This management and treatment is less effective for those with advanced stages of cancer but works well in early stages with high rates of cure. Advanced vaginal cancer only has a 5-year survival rates of 52.2
some benefit. This management and treatment is less effective for those with advanced stages of cancer but works well in early stages with high rates of cure. Advanced vaginal cancer only has a 5-year survival rates of 52.2%, 42.5% and 20.5% for patients with stage

categorised based on their growth patterns as either; aggressive (fast-growing) or indolent (slow-growing). Although the cause of T-cell lymphoma is not definitive, it has been associated with various risk factors and viruses such as Epstein Barr virus (EBV)
with various risk factors and viruses such as Epstein Barr virus (EBV) and Human T-cell leukemia virus-1 (HTLV1).The prognosis and treatment of T-cell lymphoma can vary drastically based on the specific type of lymphoma and its growth patterns. Due to their rarity and high variability
) and Human T-cell leukemia virus-1 (HTLV1).The prognosis and treatment of T-cell lymphoma can vary drastically based on the specific type of lymphoma and its growth patterns. Due to their rarity and high variability between the different subtypes, the prognosis of T-cell lymphoma is
based on the specific type of lymphoma and its growth patterns. Due to their rarity and high variability between the different subtypes, the prognosis of T-cell lymphoma is significantly worse than other Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The treatment of T-cell lymphoma is often similar to other
high variability between the different subtypes, the prognosis of T-cell lymphoma is significantly worse than other Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The treatment of T-cell lymphoma is often similar to other Non-Hodgkin lymphomas with early-stage treatments consisting of chemotherapy and/or radiology. The effectiveness
effectiveness of these treatments is often varied between subtypes with most receiving a poor outcome with high relapse rates.There are many types and variations of T-cell lymphoma, each with vastly different symptoms, survival, and prognosis. The classification of T-cell lymphoma has been difficult
.There are many types and variations of T-cell lymphoma, each with vastly different symptoms, survival, and prognosis. The classification of T-cell lymphoma has been difficult to accomplish due to the lack of understanding of their biology. Most classifications are basic with many still
with vastly different symptoms, survival, and prognosis. The classification of T-cell lymphoma has been difficult to accomplish due to the lack of understanding of their biology. Most classifications are basic with many still under the title of ‘provisional categories’ in the World Health Organization Classification
comprising subtypes which cannot be classified as either nodal, extra-nodal, or leukemicAngioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL): Aggressive form of T-cell lymphoma.Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL): Can occur as systemic ALCL which is aggressive or cutaneous ALCL which tends to
epitheliotropic intestinal T cell lymphoma (MEITL).Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma (HSTCL)While the incidences for Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma has plateaued, the rates of T-cell lymphoma has been gradually increasing over the past few years. However, due to the low frequency and lack of research performed
the rates of T-cell lymphoma has been gradually increasing over the past few years. However, due to the low frequency and lack of research performed on the disease, the number of cases is relatively underrepresented compared to other non-Hodgkin lymphoma.Cases are more common in
gradually increasing over the past few years. However, due to the low frequency and lack of research performed on the disease, the number of cases is relatively underrepresented compared to other non-Hodgkin lymphoma.Cases are more common in those of Native American descent followed by Caucasian ancestry
in those of Native American descent followed by Caucasian ancestry,  however, the epidemiology can vary greatly between the different subtypes. The incidences of T-cell lymphoma are slightly higher in men than in women in all categories of race with cases increasing in frequency with age for most
can vary greatly between the different subtypes. The incidences of T-cell lymphoma are slightly higher in men than in women in all categories of race with cases increasing in frequency with age for most subtypes.In Asia, T/NK-cell neoplasms are more common as a
with cases increasing in frequency with age for most subtypes.In Asia, T/NK-cell neoplasms are more common as a result of host factors and the higher prevalence of Human T-cell leukemia virus-1 (HTLV1) and Epstein Barr virus (EBV). While Enteropathy
) is more common among Irish and Welsh populations.Although there is no definitive cause for most T-cell lymphoma subtypes, a series of risk factors have been linked and associated with the increased likelihood of contracting the disease. Family History: A family history of hematopoietic malignancies has
This risk factor elevates the risk of contracting T-cell lymphoma.Infectious Agents: Several infectious agents have been linked to a higher risk of T-cell lymphoma by providing a compromised immune function allowing the establishment of lymphomas. Of these Epstein Barr virus (EBV) and Human
Agents: Several infectious agents have been linked to a higher risk of T-cell lymphoma by providing a compromised immune function allowing the establishment of lymphomas. Of these Epstein Barr virus (EBV) and Human T-cell leukemia virus-1 (HTLV1) are considered established risks.Epstein
T-cell leukemia virus-1 (HTLV1) are considered established risks.Epstein Barr Virus is a largely common virus with more than 90% of individuals exposed to the virus in their lifetime. EBV has been consistently associated with many lymphoproliferation disorders, of these EBV-associated T-
, NOS).The Human T-cell leukemia virus-1 is endemic in regions such as Japan and the Caribbean and has been associated with the increased risk of T-cell lymphoma such as Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL). HTLV-1 has been attributed to 56% and 78
-cell lymphoma subtypes.Hemophagocytic syndrome has been associated with most T-cell lymphoma subtypes, and is commonly characterized by fevers, reduction of lymphocytes numbers, enlarged liver or spleen, and liver dysfunction. These symptoms are especially common in Extranodal T cell lymphoma subtypes which develop outside
and cause the surface layer of the skin to break open. This is especially common in Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma subtypes. The diagnosis of T-cell lymphoma varies largely between the subtypes. Some subtypes like anaplastic large-cell lymphoma have an exceptional diagnostic rate however, for
cell lymphoma varies largely between the subtypes. Some subtypes like anaplastic large-cell lymphoma have an exceptional diagnostic rate however, for a majority of T-cell lymphoma subtypes the diagnosis is often flawed due to the difficulty to culture damaged lymphoma cells and the overall low frequency of cases
majority of T-cell lymphoma subtypes the diagnosis is often flawed due to the difficulty to culture damaged lymphoma cells and the overall low frequency of cases compared to other Non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  The current and most accurate diagnosis used across most subtypes is a biopsy in which fresh
be affected by the lymphoma is collected from the patient to be closely examined by pathology laboratories. Other diagnostic methods are specific to the type of T-cell lymphoma, physical examination of skin or lymph nodes is common for cutaneous subtypes of T-cell lymphoma whilst others may be
the patient to be closely examined by pathology laboratories. Other diagnostic methods are specific to the type of T-cell lymphoma, physical examination of skin or lymph nodes is common for cutaneous subtypes of T-cell lymphoma whilst others may be diagnosed using blood tests. Series of scans
Other diagnostic methods are specific to the type of T-cell lymphoma, physical examination of skin or lymph nodes is common for cutaneous subtypes of T-cell lymphoma whilst others may be diagnosed using blood tests. Series of scans such as CT scan, MRI, ultrasounds, and
examination of skin or lymph nodes is common for cutaneous subtypes of T-cell lymphoma whilst others may be diagnosed using blood tests. Series of scans such as CT scan, MRI, ultrasounds, and even X-rays may also be used for diagnostic purposes.Treatment for T
used for diagnostic purposes.Treatment for T-cell lymphoma varies widely due to the large variability in the subtypes. Due to the lack of research performed in understanding the nature of T-cell lymphoma pathogenesis, a majority of cases will often have poor outcomes for the treatment or
T-cell lymphoma varies widely due to the large variability in the subtypes. Due to the lack of research performed in understanding the nature of T-cell lymphoma pathogenesis, a majority of cases will often have poor outcomes for the treatment or will relapse. However, new research
large variability in the subtypes. Due to the lack of research performed in understanding the nature of T-cell lymphoma pathogenesis, a majority of cases will often have poor outcomes for the treatment or will relapse. However, new research into new therapy methods have been made to help
for the treatment or will relapse. However, new research into new therapy methods have been made to help reduce the mortality rates and risk of relapse.Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that involves the use of one or more anti-cancer drugs and is currently the most common treatment
 In order to improve these outcomes chemotherapy has often been used in conjunction with radiotherapy followed by stem cell transplants.Radiotherapy is the use of radiation to eradicate cancer.  As the electron beams in radiotherapy only penetrate to the level of the dermis, it is a common method
radiation to eradicate cancer.  As the electron beams in radiotherapy only penetrate to the level of the dermis, it is a common method of treatment for skin lymphoma which may only occur locally such as Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, however, it is not recommended for patients with
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, however, it is not recommended for patients with systemic lymphoma conditions.Stem Cell Transplants are a common method of treatment which can either be used in conjunction with chemotherapy to improve remission and effectiveness or it can be used with relapsed lymphoma patients. Stem
related or unrelated healthy donor will donate their stem cells to the patient. Stem cells are collected from the bone marrow and are a type of cell capable of self-renewal and can differentiate into all types of cells,  this can be utilised for patients with T-cell
. Stem cells are collected from the bone marrow and are a type of cell capable of self-renewal and can differentiate into all types of cells,  this can be utilised for patients with T-cell lymphoma and has seen effective results in treating some subtypes, especially Angioimmunoblastic
to reduce the immune response.Monoclonal Antibodies (mAb) utilizes antibodies to target tumours, it induces apoptosis of the tumour through the obstruction of survival pathways. Monoclonal antibodies can be used as a single treatment agent, however, are more effective when used concurrently with chemotherapy to improve
abilities and acts by inhibiting viral replication and prevent the spread of the cancerous growth.  Nucleoside analogs are one of the most active class of drug used to treat T-cell lymphoma.  Other non-tradition or new treatment options include; protease inhibitors, signalling inhibitors,

of tissues with similar functions. Plant life and animal life rely on many organs that co-exist in organ systems.A given organ's tissues can be broadly categorized as parenchyma, the tissue peculiar to (or at least archetypal of) the organ and that does the organ
organ is an internal organ that forms a hollow tube, or pouch such as the stomach, intestine, or bladder.In the study of anatomy, the term viscus refers to an internal organ. Viscera is the plural form.The number of organs in any organism depends on
or bladder.In the study of anatomy, the term viscus refers to an internal organ. Viscera is the plural form.The number of organs in any organism depends on which precise definition of the term one uses. By one widely used definition, 79 organs have been identified
used with plants) in which tissue is embedded and then sectioned, the histological stain, and the optical microscope. In the last couple of decades, developments in electron microscopy, immunofluorescence, and the use of frozen tissue sections have enhanced the detail that can be observed in tissues
, and the use of frozen tissue sections have enhanced the detail that can be observed in tissues. With these tools, the classical appearances of tissues can be examined in health and disease, enabling considerable refinement of medical diagnosis and prognosis.Two or more organs working together in the
working together in the execution of a specific body function form an organ system, also called a biological system or body system. The functions of organ systems often share significant overlap. For instance, the nervous and endocrine system both operate via a shared organ, the hypothalamus. For
is true for the musculoskeletal system because of the relationship between the muscular and skeletal systems.Common organ system designations in plants include the differentiation of shoot and root. All parts of the plant above ground (in non-epiphytes), including the functionally distinct leaf and flower organs
distinct leaf and flower organs, may be classified together as the shoot organ system.Non-placozoan animals such as humans have a variety of organ systems. These specific systems are also widely studied in human anatomy.Cardiovascular system: pumping and channeling blood to and from the body
adrenals, i.e., adrenal glands.Excretory system: kidneys, ureters, bladder and urethra involved in fluid balance, electrolyte balance and excretion of urine.Lymphatic system: structures involved in the transfer of lymph between tissues and the blood stream, the lymph and the nodes and vessels
, ureters, bladder and urethra involved in fluid balance, electrolyte balance and excretion of urine.Lymphatic system: structures involved in the transfer of lymph between tissues and the blood stream, the lymph and the nodes and vessels that transport it including the Immune system: defending against disease
: defending against disease-causing agents with leukocytes, tonsils, adenoids, thymus and spleen.Integumentary system: skin, hair and nails of mammals. Also scales of fish, reptiles, and birds, and feathers of birds.Muscular system: movement with muscles.Nervous system
causing agents with leukocytes, tonsils, adenoids, thymus and spleen.Integumentary system: skin, hair and nails of mammals. Also scales of fish, reptiles, and birds, and feathers of birds.Muscular system: movement with muscles.Nervous system: collecting, transferring and
and spleen.Integumentary system: skin, hair and nails of mammals. Also scales of fish, reptiles, and birds, and feathers of birds.Muscular system: movement with muscles.Nervous system: collecting, transferring and processing information with brain, spinal cord and nerves.
trachea, bronchi, lungs and diaphragm.Skeletal system: structural support and protection with bones, cartilage, ligaments and tendons.The study of plant organs is referred to as plant morphology, rather than anatomy – as in animal systems. Organs of plants can be divided into vegetative
ligaments and tendons.The study of plant organs is referred to as plant morphology, rather than anatomy – as in animal systems. Organs of plants can be divided into vegetative and reproductive. Vegetative plant organs include roots, stems, and leaves. The reproductive organs are variable.
reproductive organs are essential in reproduction. However, if there is asexual vegetative reproduction, the vegetative organs are those that create the new generation of plants (see clonal colony).Many societies have a system for organ donation, in which a living or deceased donor's organ is transplanted into a
that create the new generation of plants (see clonal colony).Many societies have a system for organ donation, in which a living or deceased donor's organ is transplanted into a person with a failing organ. The transplantation of larger solid organs often requires immunosuppression to prevent organ rejection or graft
word "organ" dates back to the twelfth century and refers to any musical instrument. By the late 14th century, the musical term's meaning had narrowed to refer specifically to the keyboard-based instrument. At the same time, a second meaning arose, in reference to
meaning arose, in reference to a "body part adapted to a certain function".Plant organs are made from tissue composed of different types of tissue. The three tissue types are ground, vascular, and dermal. When three or more organs are present, it is called an
is called an organ system.The adjective visceral, also splanchnic, is used for anything pertaining to the internal organs. Historically, viscera of animals were examined by Roman pagan priests like the haruspices or the augurs in order to divine the future by their shape, dimensions or other
or piece of connective tissue, referring to the opposing sides.Aristotle used the word frequently in his philosophy, both to describe the organs of plants or animals (e.g. the roots of a tree, the heart or liver of an animal), and to describe more abstract "
the seven vital organs and the seven classical planets as follows:The variations in natural language definitions of what constitutes an organ, their degree of precision, and the variations in how they map to ontologies and taxonomies in information science (for example, to count how many organs exist
analyzed the science journalism coverage of the evolving scientific understanding of the mesentery. He explored a challenge now faced by anatomists: as human understanding of ontology generally (that is, how things are defined, and how the relationship of one thing to another is defined) meets applied ontology
frontiers, as humans can only declare computer ontologies with certainty and finality to the extent that their own cognitive taxonomy (that is, science's understanding of the universe) is certain and final. For example, the fact that the tissues of the mesentery are continuous was something that
represent existing human knowledge more clearly for computing purposes.Beginning in the 20th century transplants began to occur as scientists knew more about the anatomy of organs. These came later in time as procedures were often dangerous and difficult.  Both the source and method of obtaining the organ to
transplant are major ethical issues to consider, and because organs as resources for transplant are always more limited than demand for them, various notions of justice, including distributive justice, are developed in the ethical analysis.  This situation continues as long as transplantation relies upon organ donors rather
 This situation continues as long as transplantation relies upon organ donors rather than technological innovation, testing, and industrial manufacturing.The organ level of organisation in animals can be first detected in flatworms and the more derived phyla. The less-advanced taxa (like Placozoa, Sponges and
evolved in the stem vertebrates more than 500 million years ago, while the gut and brain are even more ancient, arising in the ancestor of vertebrates, insects, and worms more than 600 million years ago.Given the ancient origin of most vertebrate organs, researchers have looked for
looked for model systems, where organs have evolved more recently, and ideally have evolved multiple times independently. An outstanding model for this kind of research is the placenta, which has evolved more than 100 times independently in vertebrates, has evolved relatively recently in some lineages, and exists
extant taxa. Studies on the evolution of the placenta have identified a variety of genetic and physiological processes that contribute to the origin and evolution of organs, these include the re-purposing of existing animal tissues, the acquisition of new functional properties by these tissues, and novel interactions


, has a high risk of recurrence, and has a poor survival rate. Thymic carcinoma is divided into subtypes, depending on the types of cells in which the cancer began. Also called type C thymoma. This article incorporates public domain material from the U.S. National Cancer Institute document
childhood solid tumor.  The survival rate for CNS tumors is around 60%.  Pediatric brain cancer is the second-leading cause of childhood cancer death, just after leukemia.  Recent trends suggest that the rate of overall CNS tumor diagnosis is increasing by about 2.7%
critical tumor suppressor biallelically inactivated in rhabdoid tumors. Identification of INI1 as a tumor suppressor has facilitated accurate diagnosis of rhabdoid tumors.The rate of transcription for SWI/SNF and HDAC complexes seem to be regulated by the INI1 gene.  The SWI/SNF complex plays a role
the function of the gene is not yet understood. There is not enough known about the function of INI1, either as an independent modulator of gene expression or through its association with the SWI/SNF complex, to be able to use specific targeted biological agents for treatment.  
were diagnosed with CNS atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT). The two boys, diagnosed at 2 months and 17 months of age, had a germline insertion mutation in exon 4 of the INI1 gene that was inherited from their healthy mother. A maternal uncle died
the kidney.  The identification of two unaffected carriers in a family segregating a germline mutation and rhabdoid tumor supports the hypothesis that variable risks of development of rhabdoid tumor in the context of a germline mutation may exist. Most rhabdoid tumors may occur in a developmental window. This family
.  The identification of two unaffected carriers in a family segregating a germline mutation and rhabdoid tumor supports the hypothesis that variable risks of development of rhabdoid tumor in the context of a germline mutation may exist. Most rhabdoid tumors may occur in a developmental window. This family highlights the
tumor in the context of a germline mutation may exist. Most rhabdoid tumors may occur in a developmental window. This family highlights the importance of mutation analysis in all patients with a suspected rhabdoid tumor.In the first case report of monozygotic twins, both with brain tumors having similar
carcinoma and two had an AT/RT.  Although the mother had a normal somatic DNA, the mutation apparently was inherited from the mother's germline due to a mutation during oogenesis.Izycka-Swieszewska et al. describe a five-month-old child with an AT/
and two had an AT/RT.  Although the mother had a normal somatic DNA, the mutation apparently was inherited from the mother's germline due to a mutation during oogenesis.Izycka-Swieszewska et al. describe a five-month-old child with an AT/
, both tumors resemble rhabdomyosarcoma.The tumor histopathology is jumbled small and large cells.  The tissue of this tumor contains many different types of cells including the rhabdoid cells, large spindled cells, epithelial and mesenchymal cells, and areas resembling primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET).  
any area of the body).  Ho and associates found sickle-shaped embracing cells, previously unreported, in all of 11 cases of AT/RT.Immunohistochemical staining is widely used in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Specific molecular markers are characteristic of particular cancer types. Immunohistochemistry
-shaped embracing cells, previously unreported, in all of 11 cases of AT/RT.Immunohistochemical staining is widely used in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Specific molecular markers are characteristic of particular cancer types. Immunohistochemistry is also widely used in basic research to understand the distribution and localization
cancer. Specific molecular markers are characteristic of particular cancer types. Immunohistochemistry is also widely used in basic research to understand the distribution and localization of biomarkers in different parts of a tissue.  Proteins found in an ATeratoid/RT are:Vimentin-positiveCytokeratin-positiveNeuron specific enolase-
the diagnosis from a medulloblastoma or PNET to the more aggressive AT/RT classification. However, this mutation is not present in 100% of cases.  Therefore, if the mutation is not present in an otherwise classic AT/RT immunohistochemical and morphologic pattern then the diagnosis remains
, a pathologist must perform a cytological or genetic analysis.Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid is important (CSF), as one-third of patients will have intracranial dissemination with involvement of the CSF. Large tumor cells, eccentricity of the nuclei, and prominent nucleoli are consistent findings
errors in treatment and prognosis.Atypical teratoid/rhaboid tumor closely resembles medulloblastoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumor, choroid plexus carcinoma, and some kinds of germ cell tumor.  Because rhabdoid characteristics are not the only component of AT/RT, some sections of an AT/RT may
a child under the age of one.  Cytogenetic studies can assist in differentiating MB/PNETs from AT/RTs.  Some kinds of germ cell tumors secrete tumor markers AFP or bHCG; AT/RTs do not.AT/RTs can occur at any sites within the
predilection exists for the cerebellopontine angle, which makes surgical resection difficult. One-third or more children will have disseminated disease at the time of diagnosis. Total or near-total resections are often not possible.Around 50% of the AT/RTs will transiently respond, but
results in 2005.  The proposed treatments did not have different outcomes and were not an improvement on prior treatments. Geyer published a review of chemotherapy on 299 infants with CNS tumors that evaluated response rate, event-free survival (EFS), and toxicity of two chemotherapeutic regimens
299 infants with CNS tumors that evaluated response rate, event-free survival (EFS), and toxicity of two chemotherapeutic regimens for treatment of children younger than 36 months with malignant brain tumors.  Patients were randomly assigned to one of two regimens of induction chemotherapy (vincristine,
two chemotherapeutic regimens for treatment of children younger than 36 months with malignant brain tumors.  Patients were randomly assigned to one of two regimens of induction chemotherapy (vincristine, cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, and etoposide v vincristine, carboplatin, ifosfamide, and etoposide). Intensified induction chemotherapy resulted
regrow the bone marrow.  Stem cell rescue or autologous bone marrow transplantation, was initially thought to be of benefit to a wide group of patients, but has declined over the history of chemotherapy protocols.The traditional practice for childhood brain tumors has been to use chemotherapy and to
or autologous bone marrow transplantation, was initially thought to be of benefit to a wide group of patients, but has declined over the history of chemotherapy protocols.The traditional practice for childhood brain tumors has been to use chemotherapy and to defer radiation therapy until a child is older than
is older than three years.  This strategy is based upon observations that children under three have significant long-term complications as a result of brain irradiation.  However, the long-term outcomes of AT/RT are so poor that some protocols call for upfront radiation therapy
AT/RT are so poor that some protocols call for upfront radiation therapy, often in spite of young age.The dose and volume of radiation had not been standardized, but radiation does appear to improve survival.  The use of radiation has been limited in children younger than
of young age.The dose and volume of radiation had not been standardized, but radiation does appear to improve survival.  The use of radiation has been limited in children younger than three because of the risk of severe neurocognitive deficits.   Protocols using conformal, local radiation in
opened in Europe. (Germany, Switzerland, and France).This protocol is still in preclinical evaluation.  Histone deacetylase inhibitors are a new class of anticancer agents targeted directly at chromatin remodeling. These agents have been used in acute promyelocytic leukemia and have been found to affect the HDAC-
, fertility, cognition, and learning.Metastatic spread is noted in roughly one-third of the AT/RT cases at the time of diagnosis, and tumors can occur anywhere throughout the CNS.  The ASCO study of the 188 documented AT/RT cases prior to 2004
(leptomenigeal spread sometimes referred to as sugar coating) is common both initially and with relapse.  Average survival times decline with the presence of metastasis.  Primary CNS tumors generally metastasize only within the CNS.One case of metastatic disease to the abdomen via ventriculoperitoneal shunt has been reported with
brain tumors, including germinomas, medulloblastomas, astrocytomas, glioblastomas, ependymomas, and endodermal sinus tumors.  Guler and Sugita separately reported cases of lung metastasis without a shunt.An estimated 3% of pediatric brain tumors are AT/RTs, although this percentage may increase with better
, and new strategies for these tumors.  The consensus paper on the biology of the tumor was published in Clinical Research.The workshop's recognition that CNS atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT) have deletions of the INI1 gene indicates that rhabdoid tumors of the kidney
demographic features.Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor is rare, and no therapy has been proven to deliver long-term survival, nor a set of protocols made standard.  Thus, most children with AT/RT are enrolled in clinical trials to attempt to find an effective cure.
exists.Research into stem cell transplant surgeries is ongoing.In 2011, The New Yorker published an article by Aleksandar Hemon, about the author's daughter's battle with AT/RT.In August 2011, a 6-year-old named Avalanna Routh who was battling AT/RT at
.Research into stem cell transplant surgeries is ongoing.In 2011, The New Yorker published an article by Aleksandar Hemon, about the author's daughter's battle with AT/RT.In August 2011, a 6-year-old named Avalanna Routh who was battling AT/RT at
into stem cell transplant surgeries is ongoing.In 2011, The New Yorker published an article by Aleksandar Hemon, about the author's daughter's battle with AT/RT.In August 2011, a 6-year-old named Avalanna Routh who was battling AT/RT at Dana–
the game was reworked to instead act as a tribute to Ryan and Amy's five short years with their third child. The Green family's experiences are also documented in the film Thank You For Playing.Ben BowenEpithelioid sarcoma

GH) insufficiency, caused by the reduction in GH production - symptoms include:Stunted growth and delayed puberty (in children)General fatigue, loss of muscle mass and tone (in adults)Pituitary insufficiencyOften occurs to some degree because craniopharyngiomas develop in the area of the pituitary stalk, which can affect
due to the "stalk effect". This elevation occurs as a result of the compression of the pituitary stalk, which interferes with the brain's control of prolactin production.In premenopausal women, elevated prolactin can lead to reduction or loss of menstrual periods and/or breast milk production (galactorrhea).With
to the "stalk effect". This elevation occurs as a result of the compression of the pituitary stalk, which interferes with the brain's control of prolactin production.In premenopausal women, elevated prolactin can lead to reduction or loss of menstrual periods and/or breast milk production (galactorrhea).With
"stalk effect". This elevation occurs as a result of the compression of the pituitary stalk, which interferes with the brain's control of prolactin production.In premenopausal women, elevated prolactin can lead to reduction or loss of menstrual periods and/or breast milk production (galactorrhea).With stalk effect
fatal. Symptoms include:FatigueLow blood pressureElectrolyte abnormalitiesCraniopharyngioma is a rare, usually suprasellar neoplasm, which may be cystic, that develops from nests of epithelium derived from Rathke's pouch. Rathke's pouch is an embryonic precursor of the anterior pituitary.Craniopharyngiomas are typically very slow-growing
along the pituitary stalk, specifically from nests of odontogenic (tooth-forming) epithelium within the suprasellar/diencephalic region, so contain deposits of calcium that are evident on an X-ray.A physician can conduct a few scans and tests to diagnose a person with craniopharyngioma.
.In the adamantinomatous type, calcifications are visible on neuroimaging and are helpful in diagnosis.The papillary type rarely calcifies. A vast majority of craniopharyngiomas in children are adamantiomatous, whereas both subtypes are common in adults. Mixed-type tumors also occur.On macroscopic examination, craniopharyngiomas
has been found between malignancy and initial chemoradiotherapy treatment, and the overall survival rate was very poor with median survival being 6 months after diagnosis of malignancy.Although the causes of craniopharyngioma are unknown, it can occur in both children and adults, with a peak in incidence at 9
initial chemoradiotherapy treatment, and the overall survival rate was very poor with median survival being 6 months after diagnosis of malignancy.Although the causes of craniopharyngioma are unknown, it can occur in both children and adults, with a peak in incidence at 9 to 14 years of age.
the causes of craniopharyngioma are unknown, it can occur in both children and adults, with a peak in incidence at 9 to 14 years of age. About 120 cases are diagnosed each year in the United States in patients under the age of 19. More than 50% of
directly inherited from the parents.Treatment generally consists of subfrontal or transsphenoidal excision. Endoscopic surgery through the nose often performed by a joint team of neurosurgeons and ENT, is increasingly being considered as an alternative to transcranial surgery done by making an opening in the skull. Because of the
can be compromised from craniopharygioma. All of these health problems can be treated with modern medicine. No high quality evidence has evaluated the use of bleomycin in this condition.Proton therapy affords a reduction in dose to critical structures compared to conventional photon radiation, including IMRT, for patients
tumours.Craniopharyngiomas are generally benign, but are known to recur after resection. Recent research has demonstrated a malignant (but rare) tendency of craniopharyngiomas. These malignant craniopharyngiomas are very rare, but are associated with poor prognosis.Current research has shown ways of treating the tumors in
have shown how the hypothalamus can be stimulated along with the tumor to prevent the child and adult with the tumor to become obese. Craniopharyngioma of childhood are commonly cystic in nature. Limited surgery minimizing hypothalamic damage may decrease the severe obesity rate at the expense of the need for radiotherapy
. Limited surgery minimizing hypothalamic damage may decrease the severe obesity rate at the expense of the need for radiotherapy to complete the treatment.Role of radiotherapy:Aggressive attempts at total removal does result in prolonged progression-free survival in most patients, but for tumors that clearly involve the
complications associated with radical surgery have prompted to adopt a combined strategy of conservative surgery and radiation therapy to residual tumor with an as high rate of cure. This strategy seems to offer the best long-term control rates with acceptable morbidity. But optimal management of craniopharyngiomas remains controversial.
an as high rate of cure. This strategy seems to offer the best long-term control rates with acceptable morbidity. But optimal management of craniopharyngiomas remains controversial. Although it is generally recommended that radiotherapy is given following subtotal excision of a craniopharyngioma, it remains unclear as to whether
as to whether all patients with residual tumour should receive immediate or differed at relapse radiotherapy. Surgery and radiotherapy are the cornerstones in therapeutic management of craniopharyngioma. Radical excision is associated with a risk of mortality or morbidity particularly as hypothalamic damage, visual deterioration, and endocrine complication between 45
immediate or differed at relapse radiotherapy. Surgery and radiotherapy are the cornerstones in therapeutic management of craniopharyngioma. Radical excision is associated with a risk of mortality or morbidity particularly as hypothalamic damage, visual deterioration, and endocrine complication between 45 and 90% of cases. The close proximity to
excision is associated with a risk of mortality or morbidity particularly as hypothalamic damage, visual deterioration, and endocrine complication between 45 and 90% of cases. The close proximity to neighboring eloquent structures pose a particular challenge to radiation therapy. Modern treatment technologies including fractionated 3-D conformal
the target while preserving surrounding tissue, Tumor controls in excess of 90% can be achieved. Alternative treatments consisting of radiosurgery, intracavitary application of isotopes, and brachytherapy also offer an acceptable tumor control and might be given in selected cases. More research is needed to establish the role

and a bone fracture. The most common areas where it begins are the legs, pelvis, and chest wall. In about 25% of cases, the cancer has already spread to other parts of the body at the time of diagnosis. Complications may include a pleural effusion or
, and chest wall. In about 25% of cases, the cancer has already spread to other parts of the body at the time of diagnosis. Complications may include a pleural effusion or paraplegia.The cause of Ewing sarcoma is unknown. Most cases appear to occur randomly.
. Most cases appear to occur randomly. It is sometimes grouped together with primitive neuroectodermal tumors, in a category known as the Ewing family of tumors. The underlying mechanism often involves a genetic change known as a reciprocal translocation. Diagnosis is based on biopsy of the tumor.Treatment
, surgery, and stem cell transplant. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy are being studied. Five year survival is about 70%. A number of factors, however, affect this estimate.James Ewing in 1920 established that the tumor is a distinct type of cancer. It affects about
70%. A number of factors, however, affect this estimate.James Ewing in 1920 established that the tumor is a distinct type of cancer. It affects about one in a million people per year in the United States. Ewing sarcoma occurs most often in teenagers and young
one in a million people per year in the United States. Ewing sarcoma occurs most often in teenagers and young adults and represents 2% of childhood cancers. Caucasians are affected more often than African Americans or Asians. Males are affected more often than females.Ewing sarcoma is more
more common in males (1.6 male:1 female) and usually presents in childhood or early adulthood, with a peak between 10 and 20 years of age. It can occur anywhere in the body but most commonly in the pelvis and proximal long tubular bones, especially around the growth plates
are the most common sites, followed by the tibia and the humerus. Thirty percent are overtly metastatic at presentation. 10-15% of people present with a pathologic fracture at the time of diagnosis. People usually experience extreme bone pain. Rarely, it can develop in the
and the humerus. Thirty percent are overtly metastatic at presentation. 10-15% of people present with a pathologic fracture at the time of diagnosis. People usually experience extreme bone pain. Rarely, it can develop in the vagina.Signs and symptoms include intermittent fevers, anemia
genetic event; a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22, t(11,22), which fuses the Ewing's Sarcoma Breakpoint Region 1(EWSR1) gene of chromosome 22 (which encodes the EWS protein) to the Friend Leukemia Virus Integration 1 (FLI1) gene (which encodes Friend Leukemia Integration
which occurs mostly in areas corresponding to transcription enhancers), leading to increased gene expression. The EWS-FLI1 fusion protein inhibits certain microRNAs of cells (such as miRNA-145). MiRNA-145 normally activates RNA-induced silencing complexes (RISCs) to inhibit or degrade mRNA that is involved
degrade mRNA that is involved in cell pluripotency. Thus, ESW-FLI1 inhibition of the microRNA miRNA-145 leads to increased pluripotency and decreased differentiation of cells and increased oncogenesis.A genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified three susceptibility loci located on chromosomes 1, 10 and 15
, typical findings of Ewing's Sarcoma consist of multiple confluent lytic bone lesions that have a "moth eaten" pattern due to permeative destruction of bone. There will also be a displaced periosteum as the new sub-periosteal layer of bone begins to grow on top of the tumor
"moth eaten" pattern due to permeative destruction of bone. There will also be a displaced periosteum as the new sub-periosteal layer of bone begins to grow on top of the tumor. This raised or displaced periosteum is consistent with the classic radiographic finding of the Codman triangle
on top of the tumor. This raised or displaced periosteum is consistent with the classic radiographic finding of the Codman triangle. The proliferative reaction of bone can also create delicate laminations constituting the periosteal layers and giving the radiographic appearance of an onion peel. Plain films add valuable information in
layers and giving the radiographic appearance of an onion peel. Plain films add valuable information in the initial evaluation or screening. The wide zone of transition (e.g. permeative) is the most useful plain film characteristic in differentiation of benign versus aggressive or malignant lytic lesions.Magnetic resonance imaging
does not give additional information over noncontrast studies, though some current researchers argue that dynamic, contrast-enhanced MRI may help determine the amount of necrosis within the tumor, thus help in determining response to treatment prior to surgery.Computed axial tomography (CT) can also be used
have a similar appearance. Accumulating evidence suggests that EWSR1-NFATc2 positive sarcomas, which were previously considered to possibly belong to the Ewing family of tumors, differ from Ewing sarcoma in their genetics, transcriptomes, and epigentic and epidemiological profiles, indicating that they might represent a distinct tumor
well as local disease control with surgery and/or radiation. An aggressive approach is necessary because almost all people with apparently localized disease at the time of diagnosis actually have asymptomatic metastatic disease.The surgical resection may involve limb salvage or amputation. Complete excision at the time of biopsy may be
at the time of diagnosis actually have asymptomatic metastatic disease.The surgical resection may involve limb salvage or amputation. Complete excision at the time of biopsy may be performed if malignancy is confirmed at the time it is examined. Treatment lengths vary depending on location and stage of the disease
EWS-ETS gene translocation. In addition, the synthetic retinoid derivative fenretinide (4-hydroxy(phenyl)retinamide) has been reported to induce high levels of cell death in Ewing sarcoma cell lines in vitro and to delay growth of xenografts in in vivo mouse models.In most pediatric cancers including
(4-hydroxy(phenyl)retinamide) has been reported to induce high levels of cell death in Ewing sarcoma cell lines in vitro and to delay growth of xenografts in in vivo mouse models.In most pediatric cancers including sarcoma, proton beam radiation (also known as proton therapy) delivers an
the surrounding normal tissue compared to photon radiation.Staging attempts to distinguish people with localized from those with metastatic disease. The most common areas of metastasis are the lungs, bone and bone marrow with less common areas of metastasis being the lymph nodes liver and brain. The presence of
with localized from those with metastatic disease. The most common areas of metastasis are the lungs, bone and bone marrow with less common areas of metastasis being the lymph nodes liver and brain. The presence of metastatic disease is the most important prognostic factor in Ewing's Sarcoma with the
the most important prognostic factor in Ewing's Sarcoma with the 5 year survival rate being only 30% when metastasis is present at the time of diagnosis as compared to a 70% 5 year survival rate with no metastasis present. Another important prognostic factor is the location of the primary
more distal tumors. Other factors associated with a poor prognosis include a large primary neoplasm, older age at diagnosis (older than 18 years of age) and increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels.Five-year survival for localized disease is greater than 70% after therapy.
tumor relapse.Ewing sarcomas represent 16% of primary bone sarcomas. In the United States, they are most common in the second decade of life, with a rate of 0.3 cases per million in children under 3 years of age, and as high as 4.6 cases per million
States, they are most common in the second decade of life, with a rate of 0.3 cases per million in children under 3 years of age, and as high as 4.6 cases per million in adolescents aged 15–19 years. Internationally, the annual incidence rate averages less than 2
2 cases per million children.In the United Kingdom, an average of six children per year are diagnosed, mainly males in early stages of puberty.  Due to the prevalence of diagnosis during teenage years, a link may exist between the onset of puberty and the early stages
United Kingdom, an average of six children per year are diagnosed, mainly males in early stages of puberty.  Due to the prevalence of diagnosis during teenage years, a link may exist between the onset of puberty and the early stages of this disease, although no research confirms
mainly males in early stages of puberty.  Due to the prevalence of diagnosis during teenage years, a link may exist between the onset of puberty and the early stages of this disease, although no research confirms this hypothesis.A grouping of three unrelated teenagers in Wake Forest,
is the second most common bone cancer in children and adolescents, with poor prognosis and outcome in ~70% of initial diagnoses and 10–15% of relapses.
symptoms depending upon the location and size of the tumor. When symptoms do occur, they can include:blurred visiondouble vision (diplopia)irritationpaina perception of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of
upon the location and size of the tumor. When symptoms do occur, they can include:blurred visiondouble vision (diplopia)irritationpaina perception of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of vision (
occur, they can include:blurred visiondouble vision (diplopia)irritationpaina perception of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of vision (floaters)redness, bulging or displacement of the eye (proptosis),a change in
they can include:blurred visiondouble vision (diplopia)irritationpaina perception of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of vision (floaters)redness, bulging or displacement of the eye (proptosis),a change in the shape
of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of vision (floaters)redness, bulging or displacement of the eye (proptosis),a change in the shape of the pupilpressure within the eyemetamorphopsia (a distortion of
of vision (floaters)redness, bulging or displacement of the eye (proptosis),a change in the shape of the pupilpressure within the eyemetamorphopsia (a distortion of vision where, when a person looks at a grid of straight lines, the lines appear wavy and parts of the grid appears blank).Uveal melanomas
Benign melanocytic tumors, such as iris freckles and moles (nevi), are common and pose no health risks, unless they show signs of malignancy, in which case they are classified as iris melanomas. Though derived from uveal melanocytes, iris melanomas share more in common with cutaneous
melanocytic tumors of the choroid, such as choroidal freckles and nevi, are very common and pose no health risks, unless they show signs of malignancy, in which case they are considered melanomas. Uveal melanoma is distinct from most skin melanomas associated with ultraviolet exposure; however, it
Because there are no lymphatic channels to the uveal tract, metastasis occurs through local extension and/or blood-borne dissemination. The most common site of metastasis for uveal melanoma is the liver; the liver is the first site of metastasis for 80%-90% of ocular melanoma patients. Other common
extension and/or blood-borne dissemination. The most common site of metastasis for uveal melanoma is the liver; the liver is the first site of metastasis for 80%-90% of ocular melanoma patients. Other common sites of metastasis include the lung, bones, and just beneath the skin (
for uveal melanoma is the liver; the liver is the first site of metastasis for 80%-90% of ocular melanoma patients. Other common sites of metastasis include the lung, bones, and just beneath the skin (subcutaneous). Approximately 50 percent of patients will develop metastases within 15
melanoma patients. Other common sites of metastasis include the lung, bones, and just beneath the skin (subcutaneous). Approximately 50 percent of patients will develop metastases within 15 years after treatment of the primary tumor, and the liver will be involved 90% of the time.
occur more than 10 years after treatment of the primary tumor, and patients should not be considered cured even after a 10-year interval of monitoring. Molecular features of the tumor, including chromosome 3 status, chromosome 6p status, and chromosome 8q status and gene expression profiling (
, and chromosome 8q status and gene expression profiling (such as the DecisionDx-UM test), can be used to adjust this likelihood of metastasis for an individual patient.The average survival time after diagnosis of liver metastases depends on the extent of systemic spread. The disease-
DecisionDx-UM test), can be used to adjust this likelihood of metastasis for an individual patient.The average survival time after diagnosis of liver metastases depends on the extent of systemic spread. The disease-free interval, the performance status, the liver substitution by metastases and
, this is now reserved for cases of extreme tumor burden or other secondary problems.  Advances in radiation therapies have significantly decreased the number of patients treated by enucleation in developed countries. The most common radiation treatment is plaque brachytherapy, in which a small disc-shaped shield (
outside surface of the eye, overlying the tumor. The plaque is left in place for a few days and then removed. The risk of metastasis after plaque radiotherapy is the same as that of enucleation, suggesting that micrometastatic spread occurs prior to treatment of the primary tumor.  
plaque radiotherapy is the same as that of enucleation, suggesting that micrometastatic spread occurs prior to treatment of the primary tumor.  Other modalities of treatment include transpupillary thermotherapy, external beam proton therapy, resection of the tumor, gamma knife stereotactic radiosurgery, or a combination of different modalities
the body, the five-year survival rate is about 15%.Several clinical and pathological prognostic factors have been identified that are associated with higher risk of metastasis of uveal melanomas. These include large tumor size, ciliary body involvement, presence of orange pigment overlying the tumor, and older patient
involvement, presence of orange pigment overlying the tumor, and older patient age. Likewise several histological and cytological factors are associated with higher risk of metastasis, including presence and extent of cells with epithelioid morphology, presence of looping extracellular matrix patterns, increased infiltration of immune cells, and
the tumor, and older patient age. Likewise several histological and cytological factors are associated with higher risk of metastasis, including presence and extent of cells with epithelioid morphology, presence of looping extracellular matrix patterns, increased infiltration of immune cells, and staining with several immunohistochemical markers.The
poor prognosis in uveal melanoma is inactivation of BAP1, which most often occurs through mutation of one allele and subsequent loss of an entire copy of chromosome 3 (monosomy 3) to unmask the mutant copy. Because of this function in inactivation of BAP1, monosomy 3 correlates strongly with
as isodisomy.  Thus, isodisomy 3 is prognostically equivalent to monosomy 3, and both can be detected by tests for chromosome 3 loss of heterozygosity. Monosomy 3, along with other chromosomal gains, losses, amplifications, and LOH, can be detected in fresh or paraffin-
uveal melanomas.  This analysis has been used to identify two subclasses of uveal melanomas: class 1 tumors that have a very low risk of metastasis, and class 2 tumors that have a very high risk of metastasis. Gene expression profiling outperforms all of the above-mentioned factors
of uveal melanomas: class 1 tumors that have a very low risk of metastasis, and class 2 tumors that have a very high risk of metastasis. Gene expression profiling outperforms all of the above-mentioned factors at predicting metastatic spread of the primary tumor, including monosomy 3.Currently,
the above-mentioned factors at predicting metastatic spread of the primary tumor, including monosomy 3.Currently, there is no consensus regarding type or frequency of scans following diagnosis and treatment of the primary eye tumor. Of the 50% of patients who develop metastatic disease, more than 90%
3.Currently, there is no consensus regarding type or frequency of scans following diagnosis and treatment of the primary eye tumor. Of the 50% of patients who develop metastatic disease, more than 90% of patients will develop liver metastases. As such, the majority of surveillance techniques are
scans following diagnosis and treatment of the primary eye tumor. Of the 50% of patients who develop metastatic disease, more than 90% of patients will develop liver metastases. As such, the majority of surveillance techniques are focused on the liver. These include abdominal magnetic resonance imaging
the 50% of patients who develop metastatic disease, more than 90% of patients will develop liver metastases. As such, the majority of surveillance techniques are focused on the liver. These include abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), abdominal ultrasound and liver function tests. The
.Some ophthalmologists have also found promise with the use of intravitreal avastin injections in patients suffering from radiation-induced retinopathy, a side effect of plaque brachytherapy treatment, as well as imaging surveillance with SD-OCT.Uveal melanomas are the most common primary intraocular tumor in adults.  Uveal
5.1 cases per million people per year. The incidence has remained stable for several years.In 2018, it was reported that two clusters of cases have been identified in Huntersville, NC and Auburn, AL. Cases involved alumni of Auburn University who were acquainted with each other.
warts increase the risk of invasive penile cancer by about 3.7 times if they occurred more than two years before the reference date. About half of men with penile cancer also have genital warts, which are caused by HPV.Poor hygiene—Poor hygiene can increase a man's risk of penile
. About half of men with penile cancer also have genital warts, which are caused by HPV.Poor hygiene—Poor hygiene can increase a man's risk of penile cancer.Smegma—Smegma, a whitish substance that can accumulate beneath the foreskin, is associated with greater risk of penile
condition such as reactive arthritis, infection, or diabetes. Small tears and abrasions of the penis are associated with about 3.9 times increased risk of cancer.Phimosis—Phimosis is a medical condition where the foreskin cannot be fully retracted over the glans. It is considered a significant
but this is not the case when performed in adulthood. It has been suggested that the reduction in risk may be due to reduced risk of phimosis; other possible mechanisms include reduction in risk of smegma and HPV infection.Age—Penile cancer is rarely seen in men under the
. It has been suggested that the reduction in risk may be due to reduced risk of phimosis; other possible mechanisms include reduction in risk of smegma and HPV infection.Age—Penile cancer is rarely seen in men under the age of 50. About 4 out of 5 men
Lichen sclerosus is a disease causing white patches on the skin.  Lichen sclerosus increases the risk of penile cancer. As the exact cause of lichen sclerosus is unknown, there is no known way to prevent it.Tobacco—Chewing or smoking tobacco increases the risk of penile cancer
prevent it.Tobacco—Chewing or smoking tobacco increases the risk of penile cancer by 1.5–6 times depending on the duration smoking and daily number of cigarettes.Ultraviolet light—Men with psoriasis who have been treated using UV light and a drug known as psoralen have an increased risk of
basaloid (4%)warty (6%)mixed warty-basaloid (17%)verrucous (8%)papillary (7%)other SCC mixed (7%)sarcomatoid carcinomas (1%)not otherwise specified (49%)Other types of carcinomas are rare and may include small cell, Merkel cell, clear cell, sebaceous cell or basal cell tumors. Non-epithelial malignancies
secondary malignancy, one in which the cancer has spread to the penis from elsewhere. The staging of penile cancer is determined by the extent of tumor invasion, nodal metastasis, and distant metastasis.The T portion of the AJCC TNM staging guidelines are for the primary tumor as follows
types it is around 30%.HPV vaccines such as Gardasil or Cervarix may reduce the risk of HPV and, consequently, penile cancer.The use of condoms is thought to be protective against the HPV associated penile cancer.Good genital hygiene, which involves washing the penis, the scrotum,
, and the foreskin daily with water, may prevent balanitis and penile cancer. However, soaps with harsh ingredients should be avoided.Cessation of smoking may reduce the risk of penile cancer.Circumcision during infancy or in childhood may provide partial protection against penile cancer. Several authors have
practising proper hygiene and by retracting the foreskin on a regular basis.Paraphimosis can be prevented by not leaving the foreskin retracted for prolonged periods of time.Treatment of penile cancer will vary depending on the clinical stage of the tumor at the time of diagnosis. There are several treatment
the foreskin retracted for prolonged periods of time.Treatment of penile cancer will vary depending on the clinical stage of the tumor at the time of diagnosis. There are several treatment options for penile cancer, depending on staging. They include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and biological
depending on staging. They include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and biological therapy. The most common treatment is one of five types of surgery:Wide local excision—the tumor and some surrounding healthy tissue are removedMicrosurgery—surgery performed with a microscope is used to remove the
cancerous cellsCircumcision—cancerous foreskin is removedAmputation (penectomy)—a partial or total removal of the penis, and possibly the associated lymph nodes.The role of radiation therapy includes an organ-sparing approach for early-stage penile cancer at specialized centres. Furthermore, adjuvant therapy is used for patients
which are adenocarcinomas, which arises in the exocrine pancreas. Only 1 or 2% of clinically significant pancreas neoplasms are PanNETs.The majority of PanNETs are benign, while some are malignant. The World Health Organization (WHO) classification scheme places neuroendocrine tumors into three main categories,
effects of a larger PanNET tumor, either locally or at a metastasis. About 40% of PanNETS have symptoms related to  excessive secretion of hormones or active polypeptides and are accordingly labeled as "functional"; the symptoms reflect the type of hormone secreted, as discussed below.
have symptoms related to  excessive secretion of hormones or active polypeptides and are accordingly labeled as "functional"; the symptoms reflect the type of hormone secreted, as discussed below. Up to 60% of PanNETs are nonsecretory or nonfunctional, in which there is no secretion, or
discussed below. Up to 60% of PanNETs are nonsecretory or nonfunctional, in which there is no secretion, or the quantity or type of products, such as pancreatic polypeptide (PPoma), chromogranin A, and neurotensin, do not cause a clinical syndrome although blood levels may
example:gastrinoma: the excessive gastrin causes Zollinger–Ellison syndrome (ZES) with peptic ulcers and diarrheainsulinoma: hypoglycemia occurs with concurrent elevations of insulin, proinsulin and C peptideglucagonoma: the symptoms are not all due to glucagon elevations, and include a rash, sore mouth, altered
ACTHoma, CRHoma, calcitoninoma, GHRHoma, GRFoma, and parathyroid hormone–related peptide tumorIn these various types of functional tumors, the frequency of malignancy and the survival prognosis have been estimated dissimilarly, but a pertinent accessible summary is available.Because symptoms are non-specific, diagnosis
have been estimated dissimilarly, but a pertinent accessible summary is available.Because symptoms are non-specific, diagnosis is often delayed.Measurement of hormones including pancreatic polypeptide, gastrin, proinsulin, insulin, glucagon, and vasoactive intestinal peptide can determine if a tumor is causing hypersecretion.
glucagon, and vasoactive intestinal peptide can determine if a tumor is causing hypersecretion.Multiphase CT and MRI are the primary modalities for morphologic imaging of PNETs. While MRI is superior to CT for imaging, both of the primary tumor and evaluation of metastases, CT is more readily available
are the primary modalities for morphologic imaging of PNETs. While MRI is superior to CT for imaging, both of the primary tumor and evaluation of metastases, CT is more readily available. Notably, while many malignant lesions are hypodense in contrast-enhanced studies, the liver metastases of
of metastases, CT is more readily available. Notably, while many malignant lesions are hypodense in contrast-enhanced studies, the liver metastases of PNETs are hypervascular and readily visualized in the late arterial phase of the post-contrast CT study. However, morphological imaging alone is not
On biopsy, immunohistochemistry is generally positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin. Genetic testing thereof typically shows altered MEN1 and DAXX/ATRX.The 2010 WHO classification of tumors of the digestive system grades all the neuroendocrine tumors into three categories, based on their degree of cellular differentiation (from well-differentiated
proposed by The European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society.Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor staging (AJCC)												In general, treatment for PanNET encompasses the same array of options as other neuroendocrine tumors, as discussed in that main article. However, there are some specific differences, which are discussed here.
ATRX and DAXX genes were found in about 40% of pancreatic NETs.  The proteins encoded by ATRX and DAXX participate in chromatin remodeling of telomeres;  these mutations are associated with a telomerase-independent maintenance mechanism termed ALT (alternative lengthening of telomeres) that results in abnormally
and DAXX participate in chromatin remodeling of telomeres;  these mutations are associated with a telomerase-independent maintenance mechanism termed ALT (alternative lengthening of telomeres) that results in abnormally long telomeric ends of chromosomes.ATRX/DAXX and MEN1 mutations were associated with a better prognosis.Pancreatic
these mutations are associated with a telomerase-independent maintenance mechanism termed ALT (alternative lengthening of telomeres) that results in abnormally long telomeric ends of chromosomes.ATRX/DAXX and MEN1 mutations were associated with a better prognosis.Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor at Curlie
The disease has been classified by the TNM staging system and the World Health Organization.Symptoms include blood in the urine, lump at end of penis, or bloody penile discharge.Diagnosis is established by transurethral biopsy.The most common type is papillary urothelial carcinoma. Risk factors suggested
urethral strictures.Symptoms that may be caused by urethral cancer include: Blood visible in urine.Bloody urethral discharge.Weak or interrupted flow of urine.Urination occurs often, painful urination, inability to pass urine.A lump or thickness in the perineum or penis.Enlarged lymph
common type urothelial carcinoma, and others including squamous cell carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma. Melanoma and sarcoma are rare.The World Health Organization classification of tumours of the urinary system and male genital organs (4th edn) was published in January 2016. Urethral cancer has also been classified by
also been classified by the TNM staging system.Surgery is the most common treatment for cancer of the urethra. One of the following types of surgery may be done: Open excision, Electro-resection with flash, Laser surgery, Cystourethrectomy, Cystoprostatectomy, Anterior body cavity, or
used drugs include cisplatin, vincristine, and methotrexate.Side effects include anemia (causing fatigue, weakness), nausea and vomiting, loss of appetite, hair loss, mouth sores, increased risk for infection, shortness of breath, or excessive bleeding and bruising.Primary urethral cancer
causing fatigue, weakness), nausea and vomiting, loss of appetite, hair loss, mouth sores, increased risk for infection, shortness of breath, or excessive bleeding and bruising.Primary urethral cancer is rare and contributes to less than 1% of all cancers. It is
than women and its incidence rises after the age of 75.Around half of affected people have locally advanced disease when they first present. 54–65% of cases are of the urothelial carcinoma type.Prolonged irritations of the urethra due to urinary catheterization, chronic inflammation due to infection, radiation,
after symptoms have started to occur, with a 5-year survival rate close to 3%.Steady pain in the upper right abdomenIndigestionDyspepsia (gas)Bilious vomitWeaknessLoss of appetiteWeight lossJaundice and vomiting due to obstructionEarly symptoms mimic gallbladder inflammation due to gallstones. Later, the symptoms may be that of biliary and stomach
However, Ludwig Georg Courvoisier's original observations, published in Germany in 1890, were not originally cited as a law, and no mention of malignancy or pain (tenderness) was made. These points are commonly misquoted or confused in the medical literature.Gender— approximately twice as
literature.Gender— approximately twice as common in women than men, usually in seventh and eighth decadesObesityChronic cholecystitis and cholelithiasisPrimary sclerosing cholangitisChronic typhoid infection of gallbladder; chronic Salmonella typhi carriers have 3 to 200 times higher risk of gallbladder cancer than non-carriers and 1–6% lifetime risk of
in seventh and eighth decadesObesityChronic cholecystitis and cholelithiasisPrimary sclerosing cholangitisChronic typhoid infection of gallbladder; chronic Salmonella typhi carriers have 3 to 200 times higher risk of gallbladder cancer than non-carriers and 1–6% lifetime risk of development of cancerVarious single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been shown to be
of gallbladder; chronic Salmonella typhi carriers have 3 to 200 times higher risk of gallbladder cancer than non-carriers and 1–6% lifetime risk of development of cancerVarious single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been shown to be associated with gallbladder cancer; however, existing genetic studies in GBC
; chronic Salmonella typhi carriers have 3 to 200 times higher risk of gallbladder cancer than non-carriers and 1–6% lifetime risk of development of cancerVarious single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been shown to be associated with gallbladder cancer; however, existing genetic studies in GBC susceptibility have
, CT scan, endoscopic ultrasound, MRI, and MR cholangio-pancreatography (MRCP) can be used for diagnosis. A large number of gallbladder cancers are found incidentally in patients being evaluated for cholelithiasis, or gallstone formation, which is far more common. A biopsy is the
is the only certain way to tell whether or not the tumorous growth is malignant.				Xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis (XGC) is a rare form of gallbladder disease which mimics gallbladder cancer although it is not cancerous. It was first discovered and reported in the medical literature in 1976 by J.J.
, gall bladder cancer can be treated by surgery. Surgery for gallbladder cancer is called radical cholecystectomy or extended cholecystectomy. It entails the removal of gall bladder along with adequate removal of its liver bed to the healthy tissue. The lymph nodes in the vicinity are also removed. Sometimes
duct if involved also needs to be removed. However, with gallbladder cancer's extremely poor prognosis, most patients will die within a year of surgery. If surgery is not possible, endoscopic stenting or percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) of the biliary tree can reduce jaundice and
be used with surgery. If gallbladder cancer is diagnosed after cholecystectomy for stone disease (incidental cancer), re-operation to remove part of liver and lymph nodes is required in most cases. When it is done as early as possible, patients have the best chance of long
yearGallbladder cancer is more common in South American countries, Japan, and Israel; in Chile, gallbladder cancer is the fourth most common cause of cancer deaths.5th most common gastrointestinal cancerUp to 5 times more common in women than men depending on population (e.g. 73% female in ChinaThe age
common gastrointestinal cancerUp to 5 times more common in women than men depending on population (e.g. 73% female in ChinaThe age adjusted incidence rates of gall bladder cancer is highest in Chile, followed by in the state of Assam in IndiaThe prognosis still remains poor. The cancer commonly spreads
childhood solid tumor.  The survival rate for CNS tumors is around 60%.  Pediatric brain cancer is the second-leading cause of childhood cancer death, just after leukemia.  Recent trends suggest that the rate of overall CNS tumor diagnosis is increasing by about 2.7%
critical tumor suppressor biallelically inactivated in rhabdoid tumors. Identification of INI1 as a tumor suppressor has facilitated accurate diagnosis of rhabdoid tumors.The rate of transcription for SWI/SNF and HDAC complexes seem to be regulated by the INI1 gene.  The SWI/SNF complex plays a role
the function of the gene is not yet understood. There is not enough known about the function of INI1, either as an independent modulator of gene expression or through its association with the SWI/SNF complex, to be able to use specific targeted biological agents for treatment.  
were diagnosed with CNS atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT). The two boys, diagnosed at 2 months and 17 months of age, had a germline insertion mutation in exon 4 of the INI1 gene that was inherited from their healthy mother. A maternal uncle died
the kidney.  The identification of two unaffected carriers in a family segregating a germline mutation and rhabdoid tumor supports the hypothesis that variable risks of development of rhabdoid tumor in the context of a germline mutation may exist. Most rhabdoid tumors may occur in a developmental window. This family
.  The identification of two unaffected carriers in a family segregating a germline mutation and rhabdoid tumor supports the hypothesis that variable risks of development of rhabdoid tumor in the context of a germline mutation may exist. Most rhabdoid tumors may occur in a developmental window. This family highlights the
tumor in the context of a germline mutation may exist. Most rhabdoid tumors may occur in a developmental window. This family highlights the importance of mutation analysis in all patients with a suspected rhabdoid tumor.In the first case report of monozygotic twins, both with brain tumors having similar
carcinoma and two had an AT/RT.  Although the mother had a normal somatic DNA, the mutation apparently was inherited from the mother's germline due to a mutation during oogenesis.Izycka-Swieszewska et al. describe a five-month-old child with an AT/
and two had an AT/RT.  Although the mother had a normal somatic DNA, the mutation apparently was inherited from the mother's germline due to a mutation during oogenesis.Izycka-Swieszewska et al. describe a five-month-old child with an AT/
, both tumors resemble rhabdomyosarcoma.The tumor histopathology is jumbled small and large cells.  The tissue of this tumor contains many different types of cells including the rhabdoid cells, large spindled cells, epithelial and mesenchymal cells, and areas resembling primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET).  
any area of the body).  Ho and associates found sickle-shaped embracing cells, previously unreported, in all of 11 cases of AT/RT.Immunohistochemical staining is widely used in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Specific molecular markers are characteristic of particular cancer types. Immunohistochemistry
-shaped embracing cells, previously unreported, in all of 11 cases of AT/RT.Immunohistochemical staining is widely used in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Specific molecular markers are characteristic of particular cancer types. Immunohistochemistry is also widely used in basic research to understand the distribution and localization
cancer. Specific molecular markers are characteristic of particular cancer types. Immunohistochemistry is also widely used in basic research to understand the distribution and localization of biomarkers in different parts of a tissue.  Proteins found in an ATeratoid/RT are:Vimentin-positiveCytokeratin-positiveNeuron specific enolase-
the diagnosis from a medulloblastoma or PNET to the more aggressive AT/RT classification. However, this mutation is not present in 100% of cases.  Therefore, if the mutation is not present in an otherwise classic AT/RT immunohistochemical and morphologic pattern then the diagnosis remains
, a pathologist must perform a cytological or genetic analysis.Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid is important (CSF), as one-third of patients will have intracranial dissemination with involvement of the CSF. Large tumor cells, eccentricity of the nuclei, and prominent nucleoli are consistent findings
errors in treatment and prognosis.Atypical teratoid/rhaboid tumor closely resembles medulloblastoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumor, choroid plexus carcinoma, and some kinds of germ cell tumor.  Because rhabdoid characteristics are not the only component of AT/RT, some sections of an AT/RT may
a child under the age of one.  Cytogenetic studies can assist in differentiating MB/PNETs from AT/RTs.  Some kinds of germ cell tumors secrete tumor markers AFP or bHCG; AT/RTs do not.AT/RTs can occur at any sites within the
predilection exists for the cerebellopontine angle, which makes surgical resection difficult. One-third or more children will have disseminated disease at the time of diagnosis. Total or near-total resections are often not possible.Around 50% of the AT/RTs will transiently respond, but
results in 2005.  The proposed treatments did not have different outcomes and were not an improvement on prior treatments. Geyer published a review of chemotherapy on 299 infants with CNS tumors that evaluated response rate, event-free survival (EFS), and toxicity of two chemotherapeutic regimens
299 infants with CNS tumors that evaluated response rate, event-free survival (EFS), and toxicity of two chemotherapeutic regimens for treatment of children younger than 36 months with malignant brain tumors.  Patients were randomly assigned to one of two regimens of induction chemotherapy (vincristine,
two chemotherapeutic regimens for treatment of children younger than 36 months with malignant brain tumors.  Patients were randomly assigned to one of two regimens of induction chemotherapy (vincristine, cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, and etoposide v vincristine, carboplatin, ifosfamide, and etoposide). Intensified induction chemotherapy resulted
regrow the bone marrow.  Stem cell rescue or autologous bone marrow transplantation, was initially thought to be of benefit to a wide group of patients, but has declined over the history of chemotherapy protocols.The traditional practice for childhood brain tumors has been to use chemotherapy and to
or autologous bone marrow transplantation, was initially thought to be of benefit to a wide group of patients, but has declined over the history of chemotherapy protocols.The traditional practice for childhood brain tumors has been to use chemotherapy and to defer radiation therapy until a child is older than
is older than three years.  This strategy is based upon observations that children under three have significant long-term complications as a result of brain irradiation.  However, the long-term outcomes of AT/RT are so poor that some protocols call for upfront radiation therapy
AT/RT are so poor that some protocols call for upfront radiation therapy, often in spite of young age.The dose and volume of radiation had not been standardized, but radiation does appear to improve survival.  The use of radiation has been limited in children younger than
of young age.The dose and volume of radiation had not been standardized, but radiation does appear to improve survival.  The use of radiation has been limited in children younger than three because of the risk of severe neurocognitive deficits.   Protocols using conformal, local radiation in
opened in Europe. (Germany, Switzerland, and France).This protocol is still in preclinical evaluation.  Histone deacetylase inhibitors are a new class of anticancer agents targeted directly at chromatin remodeling. These agents have been used in acute promyelocytic leukemia and have been found to affect the HDAC-
, fertility, cognition, and learning.Metastatic spread is noted in roughly one-third of the AT/RT cases at the time of diagnosis, and tumors can occur anywhere throughout the CNS.  The ASCO study of the 188 documented AT/RT cases prior to 2004
(leptomenigeal spread sometimes referred to as sugar coating) is common both initially and with relapse.  Average survival times decline with the presence of metastasis.  Primary CNS tumors generally metastasize only within the CNS.One case of metastatic disease to the abdomen via ventriculoperitoneal shunt has been reported with
brain tumors, including germinomas, medulloblastomas, astrocytomas, glioblastomas, ependymomas, and endodermal sinus tumors.  Guler and Sugita separately reported cases of lung metastasis without a shunt.An estimated 3% of pediatric brain tumors are AT/RTs, although this percentage may increase with better
, and new strategies for these tumors.  The consensus paper on the biology of the tumor was published in Clinical Research.The workshop's recognition that CNS atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT) have deletions of the INI1 gene indicates that rhabdoid tumors of the kidney
demographic features.Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor is rare, and no therapy has been proven to deliver long-term survival, nor a set of protocols made standard.  Thus, most children with AT/RT are enrolled in clinical trials to attempt to find an effective cure.
exists.Research into stem cell transplant surgeries is ongoing.In 2011, The New Yorker published an article by Aleksandar Hemon, about the author's daughter's battle with AT/RT.In August 2011, a 6-year-old named Avalanna Routh who was battling AT/RT at
.Research into stem cell transplant surgeries is ongoing.In 2011, The New Yorker published an article by Aleksandar Hemon, about the author's daughter's battle with AT/RT.In August 2011, a 6-year-old named Avalanna Routh who was battling AT/RT at
into stem cell transplant surgeries is ongoing.In 2011, The New Yorker published an article by Aleksandar Hemon, about the author's daughter's battle with AT/RT.In August 2011, a 6-year-old named Avalanna Routh who was battling AT/RT at Dana–
the game was reworked to instead act as a tribute to Ryan and Amy's five short years with their third child. The Green family's experiences are also documented in the film Thank You For Playing.Ben BowenEpithelioid sarcoma

) or malignant (cancerous).Average five-year survival in the United States after being diagnosed with bone and joint cancer is 67%.The most common symptom of bone tumors is pain, which will gradually increase over time. A person may go weeks, months, and sometimes years before seeking help
commonly metastasize to bone. Secondary malignant bone tumors are estimated to be 50 to 100 times as common as primary bone cancers.Primary tumors of bone can be divided into benign tumors and cancers. Common benign bone tumors may be neoplastic, developmental, traumatic, infectious, or inflammatory
proximal tibia (around the knee joint).Examples of benign bone tumors include osteoma, osteoid osteoma, osteochondroma, osteoblastoma, enchondroma, giant cell tumor of bone and aneurysmal bone cyst.Malignant primary bone tumors include osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and other types.While
the incidence, prevalence, and mortality of malignant bone tumors are difficult to come by, particularly in the oldest (those over 75 years of age) - because carcinomas that are widely metastatic to bone are rarely ever curable, biopsies to determine the origin of the tumor in cases
primary bone tumors. CT scan, MRI and/or histopathology can aid in reaching a final diagnosis, as well as staging thereof.								Treatment of bone tumors is highly dependent on the type of tumor.Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are effective in some tumors (such as Ewing's sarcoma)
histopathology can aid in reaching a final diagnosis, as well as staging thereof.								Treatment of bone tumors is highly dependent on the type of tumor.Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are effective in some tumors (such as Ewing's sarcoma) but less so in others (such as chondrosarcoma).There
and radiotherapy are effective in some tumors (such as Ewing's sarcoma) but less so in others (such as chondrosarcoma).There is a variety of chemotherapy treatment protocols for bone tumors. The protocol with the best-reported survival in children and adults is an intra-arterial protocol where
is only done as a last resort (e.g. when even pelvic exenteration does not work or in cases of advanced pelvic/reproductive cancers).Another type of surgery is called Van Nes rotation or rotationplasty which is a form of amputation,  in which the patient's foot is turned upwards in
does not work or in cases of advanced pelvic/reproductive cancers).Another type of surgery is called Van Nes rotation or rotationplasty which is a form of amputation,  in which the patient's foot is turned upwards in a 180-degree turn and the upturned foot is used as a
advanced pelvic/reproductive cancers).Another type of surgery is called Van Nes rotation or rotationplasty which is a form of amputation,  in which the patient's foot is turned upwards in a 180-degree turn and the upturned foot is used as a knee.There are other joint preservation surgical
pelvic/reproductive cancers).Another type of surgery is called Van Nes rotation or rotationplasty which is a form of amputation,  in which the patient's foot is turned upwards in a 180-degree turn and the upturned foot is used as a knee.There are other joint preservation surgical
invasive and expensive, to result in less bone destruction and to have equivalent safety and efficacy to surgical techniques, with 66 to 96% of patients reporting freedom from symptoms. While initial success rates with RFA are high, symptom recurrence after RFA treatment has been reported, with some
ablation techniques are also increasingly being used in the palliative treatment of painful metastatic bone disease. Currently, external beam radiation therapy is the standard of care for patients with localized bone pain due to metastatic disease. Although the majority of patients experience complete or partial relief of pain following radiation
. Currently, external beam radiation therapy is the standard of care for patients with localized bone pain due to metastatic disease. Although the majority of patients experience complete or partial relief of pain following radiation therapy, the effect is not immediate and has been shown in some studies to be
is the standard of care for patients with localized bone pain due to metastatic disease. Although the majority of patients experience complete or partial relief of pain following radiation therapy, the effect is not immediate and has been shown in some studies to be transient in more than half of patients
relief of pain following radiation therapy, the effect is not immediate and has been shown in some studies to be transient in more than half of patients. For patients who are not eligible or do not respond to traditional therapies ( i.e. radiation therapy, chemotherapy, palliative surgery, bisphosphonates
tumors can be difficult to localize for directed therapy. More recently, cryoablation has also been explored as a potentially effective alternative as the area of destruction created by this technique can be monitored more effectively by CT than RFA, a potential advantage when treating tumors adjacent to critical structures.
be monitored more effectively by CT than RFA, a potential advantage when treating tumors adjacent to critical structures.The outlook depends on the type of tumor. The outcome is expected to be good for people with noncancerous (benign) tumors, although some types of benign tumors may eventually
malignant). With malignant bone tumors that have not spread, most patients achieve a cure, but the cure rate depends on the type of cancer, location, size, and other factors.Bone scintigraphy
myelogenous leukemia (CML), also known as chronic myeloid leukemia, is a cancer of the white blood cells. It is a form of leukemia characterized by the increased and unregulated growth of myeloid cells in the bone marrow and the accumulation of these cells in the blood. CML
improved long-term survival rates since 2001. These drugs have revolutionized treatment of this disease and allow most patients to have a good quality of life when compared to the former chemotherapy drugs. In Western countries, CML accounts for 15–25% of all adult leukemias and 14% of
of life when compared to the former chemotherapy drugs. In Western countries, CML accounts for 15–25% of all adult leukemias and 14% of leukemias overall (including the pediatric population, where CML is less common).The way CML presents depends on the stage of the disease at diagnosis as
with symptoms indicative of hepatosplenomegaly and the resulting upper quadrant pain this causes. The enlarged spleen may put pressure on the stomach causing a loss of appetite and resulting weight loss. It may also present with mild fever and night sweats due to an elevated basal level of metabolism.Some
causing a loss of appetite and resulting weight loss. It may also present with mild fever and night sweats due to an elevated basal level of metabolism.Some (<10%) are diagnosed during the accelerated stage which most often presents bleeding, petechiae and ecchymosis. In these
region") gene from chromosome 22 is fused with the ABL gene on chromosome 9. This abnormal "fusion" gene generates a protein of p210 or sometimes p185 weight (p210 is short for 210 kDa protein, a shorthand used for characterizing proteins based solely on size).
-ABL transcript is continuously active and does not require activation by other cellular messaging proteins. In turn, BCR-ABL activates a cascade of proteins that control the cell cycle, speeding up cell division. Moreover, the BCR-ABL protein inhibits DNA repair, causing genomic instability
activity of the BCR-ABL protein have been developed. These tyrosine kinase inhibitors can induce complete remissions in CML, confirming the central importance of bcr-abl as the cause of CML.CML is often suspected on the basis of a complete blood count, which shows increased granulocytes of all
9;22) translocation, or have evidence of the translocation by FISH or RT-PCR in spite of normal routine karyotyping. The small subset of patients without detectable molecular evidence of BCR-ABL1 fusion may be better classified as having an undifferentiated myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorder, as their clinical
a similar appearance on a blood smear.CML is often divided into three phases based on clinical characteristics and laboratory findings. In the absence of intervention, CML typically begins in the chronic phase, and over the course of several years progresses to an accelerated phase and ultimately to a
). Some patients may already be in the accelerated phase or blast crisis by the time they are diagnosed. Chronic phase Approximately 85% of patients with CML are in the chronic phase at the time of diagnosis. During this phase, patients are usually asymptomatic or have only mild
blast crisis by the time they are diagnosed. Chronic phase Approximately 85% of patients with CML are in the chronic phase at the time of diagnosis. During this phase, patients are usually asymptomatic or have only mild symptoms of fatigue, left side pain, joint and/or hip pain
with CML are in the chronic phase at the time of diagnosis. During this phase, patients are usually asymptomatic or have only mild symptoms of fatigue, left side pain, joint and/or hip pain, or abdominal fullness. The duration of chronic phase is variable and depends on how
The duration of chronic phase is variable and depends on how early the disease was diagnosed as well as the therapies used. In the absence of treatment, the disease progresses to an accelerated phase. Precise patient staging based on clinical markers and personal genomic profile will likely prove beneficial in
the disease progresses to an accelerated phase. Precise patient staging based on clinical markers and personal genomic profile will likely prove beneficial in the assessment of disease history with respect to progression risk. Accelerated phase Criteria for diagnosing transition into the accelerated phase are somewhat variable; the most widely used
-TKI criteriaHaematological resistance (or failure to achieve a complete haematological response d) to the first TKIAny haematological, cytogenetic, or molecular indications of resistance to two sequential TKIsOccurrence of two or more mutations in the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene during TKI therapyThe patient is considered to be in
blastsThe only curative treatment for CML is a bone marrow transplant or an allogeneic stem cell transplant. Other than this there are four major mainstays of treatment in CML: treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors, myelosuppressive or leukopheresis therapy (to counteract the leukocytosis during early treatment), splenectomy and
myelosuppressive or leukopheresis therapy (to counteract the leukocytosis during early treatment), splenectomy and interferon alfa-2b treatment. Due to the high median age of patients with CML it is relatively rare for CML to be seen in pregnant women, despite this, however, chronic myelogenous leukemia can be
like imatinib; in these situations it may be the preferred myelosuppressive agent due to its relative lack of leukemogenic effects and hence the relative lack of potential for secondary hematologic malignancies to result from treatment. IRIS, an international study that compared interferon/cytarabine combination and the first of these
that compared interferon/cytarabine combination and the first of these new drugs imatinib, with long-term follow up, demonstrated the clear superiority of tyrosine-kinase-targeted inhibition over existing treatments. Imatinib The first of this new class of drugs was imatinib mesylate (marketed as Gleevec
term follow up, demonstrated the clear superiority of tyrosine-kinase-targeted inhibition over existing treatments. Imatinib The first of this new class of drugs was imatinib mesylate (marketed as Gleevec or Glivec), approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2001.
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2001. Imatinib was found to inhibit the progression of CML in the majority of patients (65–75%) sufficiently to achieve regrowth of their normal bone marrow stem cell population (a cytogenetic response) with stable proportions of
cells (as evaluated by RT-PCR) persist in nearly all patients, the treatment has to be continued indefinitely. Since the advent of imatinib, CML has become the first cancer in which a standard medical treatment may give to the patient a normal life expectancy. Dasatinib,
intolerant of imatinib. Bosutinib received US FDA and EU European Medicines Agency approval on 4 September 2012 and 27 March 2013 respectively for the treatment of adult patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph+) chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) with resistance, or intolerance to prior therapy. Treatment
CML) with resistance, or intolerance to prior therapy. Treatment-resistant CML While capable of producing significantly improved responses compared with the action of imatinib, neither dasatinib nor nilotinib could overcome drug resistance caused by one particular mutation found to occur in the structure of BCR-ABL1 known
This is a study which is ongoing through 2014. In September 2012, the FDA approved omacetaxine for the treatment of CML in the case of resistance to other chemotherapeutic agents.Independently, ARIAD pharmaceuticals, adapting the chemical structures from first and second-generation TK inhibitors, arrived at
T315I, as well as all other known mutations of the oncoprotein. The drug, ponatinib, gained FDA approval in December 2012 for treatment of patients with resistant or intolerant CML. Just as with second generation TK inhibitors, early approval is being sought to extend the use of ponatinib
treatment of patients with resistant or intolerant CML. Just as with second generation TK inhibitors, early approval is being sought to extend the use of ponatinib to newly diagnosed CML also.In 2005, encouraging but mixed results of vaccination were reported with the BCR/ABL1 p210 fusion protein
inhibitors, early approval is being sought to extend the use of ponatinib to newly diagnosed CML also.In 2005, encouraging but mixed results of vaccination were reported with the BCR/ABL1 p210 fusion protein in patients with stable disease, with GM-CSF as an adjuvant.Before
reported with the BCR/ABL1 p210 fusion protein in patients with stable disease, with GM-CSF as an adjuvant.Before the advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the median survival time for CML patients had been about 3–5 years from time of diagnosis.With the use of tyrosine
as an adjuvant.Before the advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the median survival time for CML patients had been about 3–5 years from time of diagnosis.With the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, survival rates have improved dramatically. A 2006 followup of 553 patients using imatinib (Gleevec
advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the median survival time for CML patients had been about 3–5 years from time of diagnosis.With the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, survival rates have improved dramatically. A 2006 followup of 553 patients using imatinib (Gleevec) found an overall survival rate
an overall survival rate of 95.2% after 8 years, which is similar to the rate in the general population. Fewer than 1% of patients died because of leukemia progression.CML accounts for 8% of all leukaemias in the UK, and around 680 people were diagnosed with
may be birth defects resulting from errors during development of the embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information
embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information or providing regulatory functions at somatic sites.Extragonadal GCTs were
classes reflect an important clinical difference. Compared to germinomatous tumors, nongerminomatous tumors tend to grow faster, have an earlier mean age at time of diagnosis ( around 25 years versus 35 years, in the case of testicular cancers), and have a lower five-year survival rate
radiation, and they also respond well to chemotherapy.  The prognosis for nongerminomatous tumours has improved dramatically, however, due to the use of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens.Mixed germ cell tumors occur in many forms.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal
.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal sinus tumor.Teratocarcinoma refers to a germ cell tumor that is a mixture of teratoma with embryonal carcinoma, or with choriocarcinoma, or with both.  This kind of mixed germ cell tumor may be known simply as
neonates, infants, and children younger than 4 years, most are sacrococcygeal teratomas.Males with Klinefelter syndrome have a 50 times greater risk of GSTs.  In these persons, GSTs usually contain nonseminomatous elements, present at an earlier age, and seldom are gonadal in location.
are being evaluated for tumors that do not respond to chemotherapy.The 1997 International Germ Cell Consensus Classification is a tool for estimating the risk of relapse after treatment of malignant germ-cell tumor.A small study of ovarian tumors in girls reports a correlation between cystic and benign tumors
can be estimated by ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan before surgery, this permits selection of the most appropriate surgical plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found
plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found that for 454 men with nonseminomatous (nongerminomatous) GCTs diagnosed between 1975 and 1989, five-year survival increased over
or by internal dysfunctions.  For example, internal dysfunctions of the immune system can produce a variety of different diseases, including various forms of immunodeficiency, hypersensitivity, allergies and autoimmune disorders.In humans, disease is often used more broadly to refer to any condition that causes pain
this broader sense, it sometimes includes injuries, disabilities, disorders, syndromes, infections, isolated symptoms, deviant behaviors, and atypical variations of structure and function, while in other contexts and for other purposes these may be considered distinguishable categories. Diseases can affect people not only physically
categories. Diseases can affect people not only physically, but also mentally, as contracting and living with a disease can alter the affected person's perspective on life.Death due to disease is called death by natural causes. There are four main types of disease: infectious diseases,
can alter the affected person's perspective on life.Death due to disease is called death by natural causes. There are four main types of disease: infectious diseases, deficiency diseases, hereditary diseases (including both genetic diseases and non-genetic hereditary diseases), and physiological diseases
.  In developed countries, the diseases that cause the most sickness overall are neuropsychiatric conditions, such as depression and anxiety. The study of disease is called pathology, which includes the study of etiology, or cause.In many cases, terms such as disease, disorder,
the most sickness overall are neuropsychiatric conditions, such as depression and anxiety. The study of disease is called pathology, which includes the study of etiology, or cause.In many cases, terms such as disease, disorder, morbidity, sickness and illness are used interchangeably; however
but expected to produce symptoms later, is usually considered a disease.  Non-infectious diseases are all other diseases, including most forms of cancer, heart disease, and genetic disease.Acquired diseaseAn acquired disease is one that began at some point during one's lifetime, as
including most forms of cancer, heart disease, and genetic disease.Acquired diseaseAn acquired disease is one that began at some point during one's lifetime, as opposed to disease that was already present at birth, which is congenital disease. Acquired sounds like it could mean "caught
one that persists over time, often characterized as at least six months but may also include illnesses that are expected to last for the entirety of one's natural life.Congenital disorder or congenital diseaseA congenital disorder is one that is present at birth. It is often a genetic disease
their sources explained and therefore shed their idiopathic status. For example, when germs were discovered, it became known that they were a cause of infection, but particular germs and diseases had not been linked. In another example, it is known that autoimmunity is the cause of some
, but particular germs and diseases had not been linked. In another example, it is known that autoimmunity is the cause of some forms of diabetes mellitus type 1, even though the particular molecular pathways by which it works are not yet understood. It is also common to know
as an associated phenomenon.Incurable diseaseA disease that cannot be cured. Incurable diseases are not necessarily terminal diseases, and sometimes a disease's symptoms can be treated sufficiently for the disease to have little or no impact on quality of life.Primary diseaseA primary disease is a disease
not necessarily terminal diseases, and sometimes a disease's symptoms can be treated sufficiently for the disease to have little or no impact on quality of life.Primary diseaseA primary disease is a disease that is due to a root cause of illness, as opposed to secondary disease, which
disease to have little or no impact on quality of life.Primary diseaseA primary disease is a disease that is due to a root cause of illness, as opposed to secondary disease, which is a sequela, or complication that is caused by the primary disease.  For example
point for bacteria, and lead to a secondary bacterial infection.Terminal diseaseA terminal disease is one that is expected to have the inevitable result of death. Previously, AIDS was a terminal disease; it is now incurable, but can be managed indefinitely using medications.IllnessThe terms illness
condition, or medicalizes a non-disease situation in his or her life – for example, a person who feels unwell as a result of embarrassment, and who interprets those feelings as sickness rather than normal emotions). Symptoms of illness are often not directly the result of infection
, a person who feels unwell as a result of embarrassment, and who interprets those feelings as sickness rather than normal emotions). Symptoms of illness are often not directly the result of infection, but a collection of evolved responses – sickness behavior by the body – that helps clear
result of embarrassment, and who interprets those feelings as sickness rather than normal emotions). Symptoms of illness are often not directly the result of infection, but a collection of evolved responses – sickness behavior by the body – that helps clear infection and promote recovery. Such aspects of
of infection, but a collection of evolved responses – sickness behavior by the body – that helps clear infection and promote recovery. Such aspects of illness can include lethargy, depression, loss of appetite, sleepiness, hyperalgesia, and inability to concentrate.DisorderA disorder is a functional abnormality
– sickness behavior by the body – that helps clear infection and promote recovery. Such aspects of illness can include lethargy, depression, loss of appetite, sleepiness, hyperalgesia, and inability to concentrate.DisorderA disorder is a functional abnormality or disturbance. Medical disorders can be categorized into
complex interaction of biological, social, and psychological factors in psychiatric conditions; however, the term disorder is also used in many other areas of medicine, primarily to identify physical disorders that are not caused by infectious organisms, such as metabolic disorders.Medical conditionA medical condition is a
) is a diseased state, disability, or poor health due to any cause. The term may refer to the existence of any form of disease, or to the degree that the health condition affects the patient.  Among severely ill patients, the level of morbidity is often
of any form of disease, or to the degree that the health condition affects the patient.  Among severely ill patients, the level of morbidity is often measured by ICU scoring systems.  Comorbidity is the simultaneous presence of two or more medical conditions, such as schizophrenia and
the term "morbidity rate" can refer to either the incidence rate, or the prevalence of a disease or medical condition. This measure of sickness is contrasted with the mortality rate of a condition, which is the proportion of people dying during a given time interval. Morbidity rates
prevalence of a disease or medical condition. This measure of sickness is contrasted with the mortality rate of a condition, which is the proportion of people dying during a given time interval. Morbidity rates are used in actuarial professions, such as health insurance, life insurance, and long
syndrome are still often called by the "syndrome" name despite that they can also be viewed as disease entities and not solely as sets of signs and symptoms.PrediseasePredisease is a subclinical or prodromal vanguard of a disease. Prediabetes and prehypertension are common examples. The nosology or epistemology
signs and symptoms.PrediseasePredisease is a subclinical or prodromal vanguard of a disease. Prediabetes and prehypertension are common examples. The nosology or epistemology of predisease is contentious, though, because there is seldom a bright line differentiating a legitimate concern for subclinical/prodromal/premonitory status (on
, because there is seldom a bright line differentiating a legitimate concern for subclinical/prodromal/premonitory status (on one hand) and conflict of interest–driven disease mongering or medicalization (on the other hand). Identifying legitimate predisease can result in useful preventive measures, such as
preventive measures, such as motivating the person to get a healthy amount of physical exercise, but labeling a healthy person with an unfounded notion of predisease can result in overtreatment, such as taking drugs that only help people with severe disease or paying for drug prescription instances whose benefit–
the precancerous tissue prevents cancer, and thus prevents a potential death from cancer.MentalMental illness is a broad, generic label for a category of illnesses that may include affective or emotional instability, behavioral dysregulation, cognitive dysfunction or impairment.  Specific illnesses known as mental illnesses include major
e.g., anatomical, chemical, or genetic) or psychological (e.g., trauma or conflict) origin. It can impair the affected person's ability to work or study and can harm interpersonal relationships.  The term insanity is used technically as a legal term.OrganicAn organic disease
but not if they are due to psychosocial issues.In an infectious disease, the incubation period is the time between infection and the appearance of symptoms. The latency period is the time between infection and the ability of the disease to spread to another person, which may precede,
between infection and the ability of the disease to spread to another person, which may precede, follow, or be simultaneous with the appearance of symptoms.  Some viruses also exhibit a dormant phase, called viral latency, in which the virus hides in the body in an inactive
of symptoms. Complete remission is the best possible outcome for incurable diseases.Flare-upA flare-up can refer to either the recurrence of symptoms or an onset of more severe symptoms.Progressive diseaseProgressive disease is a disease whose typical natural course is the worsening of the disease until
and active dying is the terminal phase.Localized diseaseA localized disease is one that affects only one part of the body, such as athlete's foot or an eye infection.Disseminated diseaseA disseminated disease has spread to other parts; with cancer, this is usually called metastatic disease.
not be defined and classified clearly, especially when cause or pathogenesis are unknown.  Thus diagnostic terms often only reflect a symptom or set of symptoms (syndrome).Classical classification of human disease derives from the observational correlation between pathological analysis and clinical syndromes. Today it is preferred to classify them
analysis and clinical syndromes. Today it is preferred to classify them by their cause if it is known.The most known and used classification of diseases is the World Health Organization's ICD. This is periodically updated. Currently, the last publication is the ICD-11.Only some diseases such as
ICD-11.Only some diseases such as influenza are contagious and commonly believed infectious. The microorganisms that cause these diseases are known as pathogens and include varieties of bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and fungi. Infectious diseases can be transmitted, e.g. by hand-to-mouth contact with infectious material
, and fungi. Infectious diseases can be transmitted, e.g. by hand-to-mouth contact with infectious material on surfaces, by bites of insects or other carriers of the disease, and from contaminated water or food (often via fecal contamination), etc.  Also,
diseases can be prevented or ameliorated with appropriate nutrition or other lifestyle changes.Some diseases, such as most (but not all) forms of cancer, heart disease, and mental disorders, are non-infectious diseases. Many non-infectious diseases have a partly or completely genetic
diseases have a partly or completely genetic basis (see genetic disorder) and may thus be transmitted from one generation to another.Social determinants of health are the social conditions in which people live that determine their health. Illnesses are generally related to social, economic, political, and
in which people live that determine their health. Illnesses are generally related to social, economic, political, and environmental circumstances. Social determinants of health have been recognized by several health organizations such as the Public Health Agency of Canada and the World Health Organization to greatly influence collective and
the World Health Organization to greatly influence collective and personal well-being. The World Health Organization's Social Determinants Council also recognizes Social determinants of health in poverty.When the cause of a disease is poorly understood, societies tend to mythologize the disease or use it as a metaphor
mythologize the disease or use it as a metaphor or symbol of whatever that culture considers evil.  For example, until the bacterial cause of tuberculosis was discovered in 1882, experts variously ascribed the disease to heredity, a sedentary lifestyle, depressed mood, and overindulgence in sex,
is any disease that is caused by pathogens and transmitted through the air.FoodborneFoodborne illness or food poisoning is any illness resulting from the consumption of food contaminated with pathogenic bacteria, toxins, viruses, prions or parasites.InfectiousInfectious diseases, also known as transmissible diseases or communicable diseases,
parasites.InfectiousInfectious diseases, also known as transmissible diseases or communicable diseases, comprise clinically evident illness (i.e., characteristic medical signs or symptoms of disease) resulting from the infection, presence and growth of pathogenic biological agents in an individual host organism. Included in this category are contagious
.  Heart disease and cancer are examples of non-communicable diseases in humans.Many diseases and disorders can be prevented through a variety of means.  These include sanitation, proper nutrition, adequate exercise, vaccinations and other self-care and public health measures.Medical therapies
attempts to improve or remove a problem, but treatments may not produce permanent cures, especially in chronic diseases.  Cures are a subset of treatments that reverse diseases completely or end medical problems permanently.  Many diseases that cannot be completely cured are still treatable. Pain management
permanently.  Many diseases that cannot be completely cured are still treatable. Pain management (also called pain medicine) is that branch of medicine employing an interdisciplinary approach to the relief of pain and improvement in the quality of life of those living with pain.Treatment for medical
completely cured are still treatable. Pain management (also called pain medicine) is that branch of medicine employing an interdisciplinary approach to the relief of pain and improvement in the quality of life of those living with pain.Treatment for medical emergencies must be provided promptly, often through an
management (also called pain medicine) is that branch of medicine employing an interdisciplinary approach to the relief of pain and improvement in the quality of life of those living with pain.Treatment for medical emergencies must be provided promptly, often through an emergency department or, in less critical
regarded in evidence-based medicine for identifying risk factors for diseases. In the study of communicable and non-communicable diseases, the work of epidemiologists ranges from outbreak investigation to study design, data collection, and analysis including the development of statistical models to test hypotheses and the documentation
epidemiologists ranges from outbreak investigation to study design, data collection, and analysis including the development of statistical models to test hypotheses and the documentation of results for submission to peer-reviewed journals. Epidemiologists also study the interaction of diseases in a population, a condition known as a syndemic
the development of statistical models to test hypotheses and the documentation of results for submission to peer-reviewed journals. Epidemiologists also study the interaction of diseases in a population, a condition known as a syndemic. Epidemiologists rely on a number of other scientific disciplines such as biology (to
poorly understood diseases, different groups might use significantly different definitions.  Without an agreed-on definition, different researchers may report different numbers of cases and characteristics of the disease.Some morbidity databases are compiled with data supplied by states and territories health authorities, at national levels or
quantify the burden imposed by diseases on people.  The years of potential life lost (YPLL) is a simple estimate of the number of years that a person's life was shortened due to a disease.  For example, if a person dies at the age of 65
diseases on people.  The years of potential life lost (YPLL) is a simple estimate of the number of years that a person's life was shortened due to a disease.  For example, if a person dies at the age of 65 from a disease, and
a person is before dying, so the measurement treats a person who dies suddenly and a person who died at the same age after decades of illness as equivalent.  In 2004, the World Health Organization calculated that 932 million years of potential life were lost to premature death.
life year (DALY) metrics are similar but take into account whether the person was healthy after diagnosis.  In addition to the number of years lost due to premature death, these measurements add part of the years lost to being sick.  Unlike YPLL, these measurements show
disability-adjusted life years were lost to disease and injury.  In the developed world, heart disease and stroke cause the most loss of life, but neuropsychiatric conditions like major depressive disorder cause the most years lost to being sick.How a society responds to diseases is the
a disease, rather than as simply a variation of human structure or function, can have significant social or economic implications. The controversial recognition of diseases such as repetitive stress injury (RSI) and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has had a number of positive and negative
RSI) and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has had a number of positive and negative effects on the financial and other responsibilities of governments, corporations, and institutions towards individuals, as well as on the individuals themselves. The social implication of viewing aging as a disease
Lepers were people who were historically shunned because they had an infectious disease, and the term "leper" still evokes social stigma. Fear of disease can still be a widespread social phenomenon, though not all diseases evoke extreme social stigma.Social standing and economic status affect health.
still be a widespread social phenomenon, though not all diseases evoke extreme social stigma.Social standing and economic status affect health.  Diseases of poverty are diseases that are associated with poverty and low social status; diseases of affluence are diseases that are associated with high social and economic
.Social standing and economic status affect health.  Diseases of poverty are diseases that are associated with poverty and low social status; diseases of affluence are diseases that are associated with high social and economic status.  Which diseases are associated with which states vary according to time,
communicable diseases are invaders; non-communicable diseases constitute internal insurrection or civil war.  Because the threat is urgent, perhaps a matter of life and death, unthinkably radical, even oppressive, measures are society's and the patient's moral duty as they courageously mobilize to struggle
the patient's moral duty as they courageously mobilize to struggle against destruction.  The War on Cancer is an example of this metaphorical use of language.  This language is empowering to some patients, but leaves others feeling like they are failures.Another class of metaphors describes the
this metaphorical use of language.  This language is empowering to some patients, but leaves others feeling like they are failures.Another class of metaphors describes the experience of illness as a journey:  The person travels to or from a place of disease, and changes himself,
.  This language is empowering to some patients, but leaves others feeling like they are failures.Another class of metaphors describes the experience of illness as a journey:  The person travels to or from a place of disease, and changes himself, discovers new information, or
they are failures.Another class of metaphors describes the experience of illness as a journey:  The person travels to or from a place of disease, and changes himself, discovers new information, or increases his experience along the way.  He may travel "on the road
right track" or choose "pathways". Some are explicitly immigration-themed:  the patient has been exiled from the home territory of health to the land of the ill, changing identity and relationships in the process.  This language is more common among British healthcare professionals
objects of spiritual or artistic achievement.  In the 20th century, after its cause was better understood, the same disease became the emblem of poverty, squalor, and other social problems.Health Topics, MedlinePlus descriptions of most diseases, with access to current research articles.OMIM
–Z, fact sheets about many common diseases at Centers for Disease ControlThe Merck Manual containing detailed description of most diseasesReport: The global burden of disease from World Health Organization (WHO), 2004Free online health-risk assessment by Your Disease Risk at Washington University in St Louis"Man and
in the throatPersistent coughStridor - a high-pitched wheezing sound indicative of a narrowed or obstructed airwayBad breathEarache (due to referred pain)Difficulty swallowingAdverse effects of treatment can include changes in appearance, difficulty eating, dry mouth, or loss of voice that may require learning alternate methods of speaking.
obstructed airwayBad breathEarache (due to referred pain)Difficulty swallowingAdverse effects of treatment can include changes in appearance, difficulty eating, dry mouth, or loss of voice that may require learning alternate methods of speaking.The most important risk factor for laryngeal cancer is smoking. Death from laryngeal cancer is
smoking. Death from laryngeal cancer is 20 times more likely for the heaviest smokers than for their non-smoking peers. Heavy chronic consumption of alcohol, particularly alcoholic spirits, is also a significant risk factor. When present in combination, the usages of alcohol and tobacco appear to
peers. Heavy chronic consumption of alcohol, particularly alcoholic spirits, is also a significant risk factor. When present in combination, the usages of alcohol and tobacco appear to have a synergistic effect. Other reported risk factors include being of low socioeconomic status, male sex, or age
to be a risk factor for laryngeal cancers. Infections by some strains of Papillomaviridae carry some risk of laryngeal carcinoma.People with a history of head and neck cancer are known to be at higher risk (about 25%) of developing a second, separate cancer of the head
developing a second, separate cancer of the head, neck, or lung. This is likely due to chronic exposure to the carcinogenic effects of alcohol and tobacco. In this situation, a field change effect may occur, where the epithelial tissues start to become diffusely dysplastic with a
under direct vision. The larynx may be examined by indirect laryngoscopy using a small angled mirror with a long handle (akin to a dentist's mirror) and a strong light. Indirect laryngoscopy can be highly effective, but requires skill and practice for consistent results. For this reason
larynx. Nasal endoscopy is a quick and easy procedure performed in clinic. Local anaesthetic spray may be used.If there is a suspicion of cancer, biopsy is performed, usually under general anaesthetic. This provides histological proof of cancer type and grade. If the lesion appears to
spray may be used.If there is a suspicion of cancer, biopsy is performed, usually under general anaesthetic. This provides histological proof of cancer type and grade. If the lesion appears to be small and well localised, the surgeon may undertake excision biopsy, where an attempt
first biopsy. In this situation, the pathologist will not only be able to confirm the diagnosis, but can also comment on the completeness of excision, i.e., whether the tumour has been completely removed. A full endoscopic examination of the larynx, trachea, and esophagus is often
whether the tumour has been completely removed. A full endoscopic examination of the larynx, trachea, and esophagus is often performed at the time of biopsy.For small glottic tumours further imaging may be unnecessary. In most cases, tumour staging is completed by scanning the head and neck
taken into account. A prognostic multigene classifier has been shown to be potentially useful for the distinction of laryngeal cancer of low or high risk of recurrence and might influence the treatment choice in future.Laryngeal tumours are classified according to the guidelines set by academic organisations such as the National
/cancer itself ("T"). The second is the extent to which adjacent lymph nodes are involved in the tumour/cancer's spread ("N"). The third is the presence or absence of any distant metastases ("M). The specific “
, except size is greater than 6 cmN3B – Tumour obviously extends beyond the lymph node border (regardless of number, size, or location of lymph nodes)If Using Pathological DiagnosisNX: Same as “Clinical Diagnosis – NX”N0:  Same as “Clinical Diagnosis – N0”N1:  Same as
Clinical Diagnosis – N2C”N3: Tumour meets ANY of the following criteria:N3A – Same as “Clinical Diagnosis – N3A”N3B – Any provable presence of tumour extension beyond the lymph nodeM0: No evidence of distant metastasisM1: Evidence of distant metastasisSpecific treatment depends on the location, type, and
tumour’s structure and spread. Full removal of the larynx may be necessary in some cases.Adjunct TreatmentAdjunct treatment, most commonly the administration of chemotherapy or radiotherapy, may be necessary.  Chemotherapy or radiotherapy may be necessary singly, in combination with each other, or in combination
to access necessary adjunct treatment. Multi-Disciplinary TreatmentOften, successful treatment of and recovery from laryngeal cancer will involve expertise outside of the realms of surgery or oncology. Physical therapists, occupational therapists, speech therapists, psychiatrists, psychologists, oral/maxillofacial surgeons,  dentists, neurologists
, psychiatrists, psychologists, oral/maxillofacial surgeons,  dentists, neurologists, neurosurgeons, and endocrinologists may all become involved in the care of patients with laryngeal cancer.Incidence is five in 100,000 (12,500 new cases per year) in the US. The American Cancer Society estimated
men and 1,810 women) would be diagnosed with and 3,740 men and women would die of laryngeal cancer in 2006.According to the GLOBOCAN 2018 estimates of cancer incidence and mortality produced by the International Agency for Research on Cancer, there were 177,422 new cases of laryngeal cancer worldwide in 2018 (
the ectoderm, which is chemically influenced by the underlying mesoderm that forms the dermis and subcutaneous tissues.The epidermis is the most superficial layer of skin, a squamous epithelium with several strata: the stratum corneum, stratum lucidum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale.
displace outwards through the stratum spinosum to the stratum corneum, where cells are continually shed from the surface. In normal skin, the rate of production equals the rate of loss; about two weeks are needed for a cell to migrate from the basal cell layer to the top of
spinosum to the stratum corneum, where cells are continually shed from the surface. In normal skin, the rate of production equals the rate of loss; about two weeks are needed for a cell to migrate from the basal cell layer to the top of the granular cell layer,
layer to the top of the granular cell layer, and an additional two weeks to cross the stratum corneum.The dermis is the layer of skin between the epidermis and subcutaneous tissue, and comprises two sections, the papillary dermis and the reticular dermis. The superficial papillary dermis interdigitates
networks that run parallel to the skin surface—one superficial and one deep plexus—which are connected by vertical communicating vessels. The function of blood vessels within the dermis is fourfold: to supply nutrition, to regulate temperature, to modulate inflammation, and to participate in wound healing
: to supply nutrition, to regulate temperature, to modulate inflammation, and to participate in wound healing.The subcutaneous tissue is a layer of fat between the dermis and underlying fascia. This tissue may be further divided into two components, the actual fatty layer, or panniculus adiposus
fascia. This tissue may be further divided into two components, the actual fatty layer, or panniculus adiposus, and a deeper vestigial layer of muscle, the panniculus carnosus. The main cellular component of this tissue is the adipocyte, or fat cell. The structure of this tissue
fat insulates the body, absorbs trauma, and serves as a reserve energy source.Conditions of the human integumentary system constitute a broad spectrum of diseases, also known as dermatoses, as well as many nonpathologic states (like, in certain circumstances, melanonychia and racquet nails).
dermatoses, as well as many nonpathologic states (like, in certain circumstances, melanonychia and racquet nails). While only a small number of skin diseases account for most visits to the physician, thousands of skin conditions have been described. Classification of these conditions often presents many nosological
certain circumstances, melanonychia and racquet nails). While only a small number of skin diseases account for most visits to the physician, thousands of skin conditions have been described. Classification of these conditions often presents many nosological challenges, since underlying etiologies and pathogenetics are often not known.
of Lewandowsky)Lupus miliaris disseminatus facieiMetophymaNeonatal acne (acne infantum, acne neonatorum, neonatal cephalic pustulosis)Occupational acneOil acneOcular rosacea (ophthalmic rosacea, ophthalmorosacea)OtophymaPeriorificial dermatitisPersistent edema of rosacea (chronic upper facial erythematous edema, Morbihan's disease, rosaceous lymphedema)Phymatous rosaceaPomade acnePapulopustular rosacea (inflammatory rosacea)Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens (dissecting
orificial mucositi)PlasmoacanthomaProliferative verrucous leukoplakiaPyogenic granuloma (eruptive hemangioma, granulation tissue-type hemangioma, granuloma gravidarum, lobular capillary hemangioma, pregnancy tumor, tumor of pregnancy)  Pyostomatitis vegetansRecurrent aphthous stomatitis (aphthosis, canker sores, recurrent oral aphthae)Recurrent intraoral herpes simplex infectionSmooth tongue (atrophic glossitis, bald
, recurrent oral aphthae)Recurrent intraoral herpes simplex infectionSmooth tongue (atrophic glossitis, bald tongue, hunter glossitis, moeller)Stomatitis nicotina (nicotine stomatitis, smoker's keratosis, smoker's patches)Torus palatinusTrumpeter's wartVestibular papillomatosisWhite sponge nevus (white sponge nevus of Cannon)Conditions of the skin appendages are those affecting the glands
intraoral herpes simplex infectionSmooth tongue (atrophic glossitis, bald tongue, hunter glossitis, moeller)Stomatitis nicotina (nicotine stomatitis, smoker's keratosis, smoker's patches)Torus palatinusTrumpeter's wartVestibular papillomatosisWhite sponge nevus (white sponge nevus of Cannon)Conditions of the skin appendages are those affecting the glands of the skin,
dermatosis (acquired perforating collagenosis)Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica of Bazex (acrokeratosis neoplastica, Bazex syndrome)AcroosteolysisAcute paronychiaAlopecia areata Alopecia neoplasticaAnagen effluviumAndrogenic alopecia (androgenetic alopecia)Anhidrosis (hypohidrosis)AnonychiaApparent leukonychiaBeau's linesBlue nailsBromidrosis (apocrine bromhidrosis, fetid sweat, malodorous sweating, osmidrosis)Bubble hair deformityCentral centrifugal cicatricial alopecia (follicular degeneration syndrome, pseudopelade of the
patella syndrome (Fong syndrome, hereditary osteoonychodysplasia, HOOD syndrome) Neoplasms of the nailbedNevoid hypertrichosisNoncicatricial alopeciaOnychauxisOnychoatrophyOnychocryptosis (ingrown nail, unguis incarnatus)Onychogryphosis (ram's horn nails)OnycholysisOnychomadesisOnychomatricomaOnychophagia (nail biting)OnychophosisOnychoptosis defluvium (alopecia unguium)Onychorrhexis (brittle nails)OnychoschiziaOnychotillomaniaOphiasisPalmoplantar hyperhidrosis (emotional hyperhidrosis)Parakeratosis pustulosaPatterned acquired hypertrichosisPerforating folliculitisPili annulati (ringed hair)Pili bifurcatiPili multigeminiPili
bifurcatiPili multigeminiPili pseudoannulati (pseudo pili annulati)Pili torti (twisted hairs)Pincer nails (omega nails, trumpet nails)Pityriasis amiantacea (tinea amiantacea)PlatonychiaPlica neuropathica (felted hair)Plummer's nailPremature greying of hairPrepubertal hypertrichosisPressure alopecia (postoperative alopecia, pressure-induced alopecia)Pseudofolliculitis barbae (barber's itch, folliculitis barbae traumatica, razor bumps
amiantacea (tinea amiantacea)PlatonychiaPlica neuropathica (felted hair)Plummer's nailPremature greying of hairPrepubertal hypertrichosisPressure alopecia (postoperative alopecia, pressure-induced alopecia)Pseudofolliculitis barbae (barber's itch, folliculitis barbae traumatica, razor bumps, scarring pseudofolliculitis of the beard, shave bumps)Pseudopelade of Brocq (alopecia cicatrisata)Psoriatic nailsPterygium inversum unguis (
eccrine hidradenitis, plantar panniculitis)Red lunulaeRoss' syndromeRubinstein–Taybi syndromeSetleis syndromeShell nail syndromeShort anagen syndromeSplinter hemorrhage Spotted lunulaeStaining of the nail plateStippled nailsSubungual hematomaTelogen effluviumTerry's nailsTraction alopeciaTraumatic alopeciaTraumatic anserine folliculosisTriangular alopecia (temporal alopecia, temporal triangular alopecia)TrichomegalyTrichomycosis axillarisTrichorrhexis invaginata (bamboo hair)Trichorrhexis nodosaTrichostasis spinulosaTufted folliculitisTumor alopeciaTwenty-nail dystrophy (
stasis panniculitis)LipohypertrophyLocalized lipodystrophyNeutrophilic lobular panniculitisNodular vasculitisNon-progressive late-onset linear hemifacial lipoatrophyPancreatic panniculitis (enzymatic panniculitis, pancreatic fat necrosis, subcutaneous fat necrosis)Poland's syndromePost-steroid panniculitisSclerema neonatorumSclerosing lipogranuloma (paraffinoma)Septal panniculitisSubcutaneous fat necrosis of the newbornTraumatic panniculitisTumor lysis syndromeWeber–Christian disease (relapsing febrile nonsuppurative panniculitis)Cutaneous congenital
lipogranuloma (paraffinoma)Septal panniculitisSubcutaneous fat necrosis of the newbornTraumatic panniculitisTumor lysis syndromeWeber–Christian disease (relapsing febrile nonsuppurative panniculitis)Cutaneous congenital anomalies are a diverse group of disorders that result from faulty morphogenesis, the biological process that forms the shape of a human body.Accessory nail of the fifth toeAccessory tragus
, preauricular tag)Amniotic band syndrome (ADAM complex, amniotic band sequence, congenital constriction bands, pseudoainhum)Aplasia cutis congenita (cutis aplasia, congenital absence of skin, congenital scars)Arteriovenous fistulaBenign neonatal hemangiomatosisBranchial cyst (branchial cleft cyst)Bronchogenic cystCapillary hemangioma (infantile hemangioma, nevus maternus, strawberry hemangioma, strawberry nevus)Cavernous
array of autoimmune responses that target or affect collagen or ground substance.Acute cutaneous lupus erythematosusAtrophoderma of Pasini and Pierini (dyschromic and atrophic variation of scleroderma, morphea plana atrophica, sclérodermie atrophique d'emblée)Calcinosis–Raynaud phenomenon–esophageal dysmotility–sclerodactyly–telangiectasia syndrome (CREST syndrome)Chilblain lupus erythematosus (
granulomatous dermatitisPansclerotic morpheaParry–Romberg syndrome (progressive hemifacial atrophy)Progressive systemic sclerosisRelapsing polychondritis (atrophic polychondritis, systemic chondromalacia)Rheumatoid arthritisRheumatoid nodulosis (accelerated rheumatoid nodulosis)Rheumatoid vasculitisRowell's syndromeScleredema adultorum (Bushke disease, scleredema diabeticorum, scleredema adultorum of Buschke, scleredema of Buschke)SilicosisSjögren's syndrome (Mikulicz disease, Sicca syndrome)Subacute cutaneous
erythematosus (lupus erythematosus tumidus)Tuzun syndromeVerrucous lupus erythematosus (hypertrophic lupus erythematosus)Winchester syndromeAbnormalities of dermal fibrous and elastic tissue are caused by problems in the regulation of collagen synthesis or degradation.Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans (Herxheimer disease, primary diffuse atrophy)Actinic elastosis (solar elastosis)Anetoderma (anetoderma maculosa, anetoderma maculosa cutis
dermal dendrocytoma, fibrous dermatofibroma, fibrous histiocytoma, fibroma simplex, histiocytoma, nodular subepidermal fibrosis, sclerosing hemangioma)Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberansDesmoid tumorDiffuse cutaneous mastocytosisDiffuse infantile fibromatosisDupuytren's contracture (Dupuytren's diathesis, Dupuytren's disease, palmar fibromatosis)Eccrine angiomatous hamartomaElastofibroma dorsiEndovascular papillary angioendothelioma (Dabska tumor, Dabska-type hemangioendothelioma,
, hobnail hemangioendothelioma, malignant endovascular papillary angioendothelioma, papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma)Epithelioid cell histiocytomaEpithelioid hemangioendotheliomaEpithelioid sarcomaErythrodermic mastocytosisExtraskeletal chondroma (chondroma of soft parts)Familial myxovascular fibromasFascial herniaFibroma of tendon sheathFibromatosis colli (sternomastoid tumor of infancy)Fibrous hamartoma of infancyFibrous papule of the nose (benign solitary fibrous papule, fibrous papule of the face)Folded
(lymphangioma)LymphangiomatosisMalignant fibrous histiocytomaMalignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (malignant schwannoma, neurofibrosarcoma, neurosarcoma)Mast cell sarcomaMeningoceleMetastatic carcinomaMicrovenular hemangioma (microcapillary hemangioma)Midline nevus flammeus (angel's kiss, salmon patch)Multifocal lymphangioendotheliomatosis (congenital cutaneovisceral angiomatosis with thrombocytopenia, multifocal lymphangioendotheliomatosis with thrombocytopenia)Multinucleate cell angiohistocytomaMultiple cutaneous and uterine leiomyomatosis syndrome (leiomyomatosis cutis
inducedSystemic contact dermatitisTear gas dermatitisTextile dermatitisTraumatic irritant contact dermatitisTree-associated plant-inducedTree-inducedTulip fingersUrshiol-inducedVegetable-inducedEczema refers to a broad range of conditions that begin as spongiotic dermatitis and may progress to a lichenified stage.Autoimmune estrogen dermatitisAutoimmune progesterone dermatitisAutosensitization dermatitisBreast eczema (nipple eczema)Chronic vesiculobullous hand
dermatosis (Sneddon–Wilkinson disease)Seborrheic dermatitis is a chronic, superficial, inflammatory disease characterized by scaling on an erythematous base.Infantile seborrheic dermatitisLeiner's diseasePityriasis simplex capillitii (dandruff)Seborrheic dermatitis (seborrheic eczema)Disturbances of human pigmentation, either loss or reduction, may be related to loss of melanocytes or
seborrheic dermatitisLeiner's diseasePityriasis simplex capillitii (dandruff)Seborrheic dermatitis (seborrheic eczema)Disturbances of human pigmentation, either loss or reduction, may be related to loss of melanocytes or the inability of melanocytes to produce melanin or transport melanosomes correctly.Albinism–black lock–cell migration disorder of the neurocytes of
capillitii (dandruff)Seborrheic dermatitis (seborrheic eczema)Disturbances of human pigmentation, either loss or reduction, may be related to loss of melanocytes or the inability of melanocytes to produce melanin or transport melanosomes correctly.Albinism–black lock–cell migration disorder of the neurocytes of the gut–deafness syndrome
bronze diabetes)Hemosiderin hyperpigmentationHermansky–Pudlak syndromeIdiopathic guttate hypomelanosis (leukopathia symmetrica progressiva)Iron metallic discolorationKlein–Waardenburg syndromeLead poisoningLeukodermaMelanoma-associated leukodermaMelasma (chloasma faciei, mask of pregnancy)Mukamel syndromeNecklace of VenusNevus anemicus Nevus depigmentosus (nevus achromicus)Ocular albinismOculocutaneous albinismPallister–Killian syndromePeriorbital hyperpigmentationPhotoleukomelanodermatitis of KoboriPhylloid hypomelanosisPiebaldismPigmentatio reticularis faciei et colliPityriasis albaPoikiloderma of CivattePoikiloderma
' disease)Reticulate acropigmentation of KitamuraRevesz syndromeRiehl melanosisScratch dermatitis (flagellate pigmentation from bleomycin)Segmental vitiligoShah–Waardenburg syndromeShiitake mushroom dermatitis (flagellate mushroom dermatitis, mushroom worker's disease, shiitake-induced toxicoderma)Tar melanosis (melanodermatitis toxica lichenoides)Tietz syndromeTitanium metallic discolorationTransient neonatal pustular melanosis (transient neonatal pustulosis, lentigines neonatorum)Trichrome vitiligoVagabond's
Froboese syndrome)MyxedemaPanhypopituitarismPersistent adrenarche syndrome (adrenal SAHA syndrome)Polycystic ovarian syndromeSeborrhoea–acne–hirsutism–alopecia (SAHA syndrome)Thyroid acropachyEosinophilic cutaneous conditions encompass a wide variety of diseases that are characterized histologically by the presence of eosinophils in the inflammatory infiltrate, or evidence of eosinophil degranulation.Angiolymphoid hyperplasia with eosinophilia (
syndromeSeborrhoea–acne–hirsutism–alopecia (SAHA syndrome)Thyroid acropachyEosinophilic cutaneous conditions encompass a wide variety of diseases that are characterized histologically by the presence of eosinophils in the inflammatory infiltrate, or evidence of eosinophil degranulation.Angiolymphoid hyperplasia with eosinophilia (epithelioid hemangioma, histiocytoid hemangioma, inflammatory angiomatous nodule
(epithelioid hemangioma, histiocytoid hemangioma, inflammatory angiomatous nodule, inflammatory arteriovenous hemangioma, intravenous atypical vascular proliferation, papular angioplasia, pseudopyogenic granuloma)Annular erythema of infancyArthropod assaultEosinophilic cellulitis (Wells' syndrome)Eosinophilic fasciitis (Shulman's syndrome)Eosinophilic granulomaEosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitisEosinophilic pustular folliculitis of infancy (eosinophilic pustular folliculitis in infancy
, papular angioplasia, pseudopyogenic granuloma)Annular erythema of infancyArthropod assaultEosinophilic cellulitis (Wells' syndrome)Eosinophilic fasciitis (Shulman's syndrome)Eosinophilic granulomaEosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitisEosinophilic pustular folliculitis of infancy (eosinophilic pustular folliculitis in infancy, infantile eosinophilic pustular folliculitis, neonatal eosinophilic pustular folliculitis)Eosinophilic ulcer of the oral mucosa (eosinophilic ulcer of
newborn)Granuloma facialeHypereosinophiliaHypereosinophilic syndromeIncontinentia pigmenti (Bloch–Siemens syndrome, Bloch–Sulzberger disease, Bloch–Sulzberger syndrome)Itchy red bump disease (papular dermatitis)Juvenile xanthogranulomaKimura's diseaseNodules–eosinophilia–rheumatism–dermatitis–swelling syndromePachydermatous eosinophilic dermatitisPapular eruption of blacksPapuloerythroderma of OfujiPruritic papular eruption of HIV diseaseEpidermal nevi, neoplasms,
, Bloch–Sulzberger syndrome)Itchy red bump disease (papular dermatitis)Juvenile xanthogranulomaKimura's diseaseNodules–eosinophilia–rheumatism–dermatitis–swelling syndromePachydermatous eosinophilic dermatitisPapular eruption of blacksPapuloerythroderma of OfujiPruritic papular eruption of HIV diseaseEpidermal nevi, neoplasms, and cysts are skin lesions that develop from the epidermal layer of the skin
syndrome)Nevus comedonicus (comedo nevus)Nevus comedonicus syndromeNevus sebaceous (nevus sebaceous of Jadassohn, organoid nevus)Nevus unius laterisNodular basal cell carcinoma (classic basal cell carcinoma)Paget's disease of the breastPapillary eccrine adenoma (tubular apocrine adenoma)Papillary hidradenoma (hidradenoma papilliferum)Papillomatosis cutis carcinoides (Gottron's carcinoid papillomatosis, papillomatosis cutis carcinoides of
catagen cyst, pilar cyst)TrichilemmomaTrichoadenoma (trichoadenoma of Nikolowski)TrichoblastomaTrichoblastic fibromaTrichodiscomaTrichofolliculomaUnilateral palmoplantar verrucous nevusUrethral caruncleVerrucous carcinomaVerrucous cyst (cystic papilloma)Viral keratosisWarty dyskeratoma (isolated dyskeratosis follicularis)Waxy keratosis of childhood (kerinokeratosis papulosa)Zoon's vulvitisZosteriform speckled lentiginous nevusErythemas are reactive skin conditions in which there is blanchable redness.Erythema annulare centrifugum (deep gyrate
Hünermann syndrome (Conradi–Hünermann–Happle syndrome, Happle syndrome, X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata)Costello syndromeCronkhite–Canada syndromeCrouzon syndromeCutis verticis gyrataDarier's disease (Darier–White disease, dyskeratosis follicularis, keratosis follicularis) DeSanctis–Cacchione syndromeDisseminated superficial actinic porokeratosisDisseminated superficial porokeratosisDolichol kinase deficiencyDominant dystrophic epidermolysis
, Hailey–Hailey disease)Fanconi syndrome (familial pancytopenia, familial panmyelophthisis)Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressivaFocal dermal hypoplasia (Goltz syndrome)Follicular atrophodermaFranceschetti–Klein syndrome (mandibulofacial dysostosis)Gardner's syndrome (familial colorectal polyposis)Gastrocutaneous syndromeGeneralized atrophic benign epidermolysis bullosaGeneralized epidermolysis bullosa simplex (Koebner variant of generalized epidermolysis bullosa simplex)Generalized trichoepitheliomaGiant axonal neuropathy with curly
autosomal dominant ichthyosis, ichthyosis simplex)Ichthyosis with confettiNeonatal ichthyosis–sclerosing cholangitis syndrome (ichthyosis–sclerosing cholangitis syndrome, NISCH syndrome)Incontinentia pigmenti achromians (hypomelanosis of Ito)Immune dysfunction–polyendocrinopathy–enteropathy–X-linked syndromeJaffe–Campanacci syndromeJohanson–Blizzard syndromeJohnson–McMillin syndromeJoubert syndromeJunctional epidermolysis bullosaJunctional epidermolysis bullosa gravis
erythrokeratodermia progressiva symmetrica)Proteus syndromeProteus-like syndromePunctate porokeratosisRapp–Hodgkin syndrome (Rapp–Hodgkin ectodermal dysplasia syndrome)Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (Hallopeau–Siemens variant of epidermolysis bullosa, Hallopeau–Siemens disease)Refsum's disease (heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformis, phytanic acid storage disease)Relapsing linear acantholytic dermatosisRestrictive dermopathy Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (
murine typhus)Epidemic typhus (epidemic louse-borne typhus)Erysipelas (ignis sacer, Saint Anthony's fire)Erysipeloid of RosenbachErythema marginatumErythrasmaExternal otitis (otitis externa, swimmer's ear) FelonFlea-borne spotted feverFlinders Island spotted feverFlying squirrel typhusFolliculitisFournier gangrene (Fournier gangrene of the penis or scrotum)Furunculosis (boil)Gas gangrene (clostridial
folliculitisGram-negative toe web infectionGranuloma inguinale (Donovanosis, granuloma genitoinguinale, granuloma inguinale tropicum, granuloma venereum, granuloma venereum genitoinguinale, lupoid form of groin ulceration, serpiginous ulceration of the groin, ulcerating granuloma of the pudendum, ulcerating sclerosing granuloma)Green nail syndromeGroup JK Corynebacterium sepsisHaemophilus influenzae cellulitisHelicobacter cellulitisHospital
(Tsutsugamushi fever)ShigellosisStaphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (pemphigus neonatorum, Ritter's disease)Streptococcal intertrigoSuperficial pustular folliculitis (impetigo of Bockhart, superficial folliculitis)Sycosis vulgaris (barber's itch, sycosis barbae)SyphilidSyphilis (lues)Tick-borne lymphadenopathyToxic shock syndrome (streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome, toxic streptococcal
tuberculous chancre)Rapid-growing Mycobacterium infectionScrofuloderma (tuberculosis cutis colliquativa)Tuberculosis cutis orificialis (acute tuberculous ulcer, orificial tuberculosis)Tuberculosis verrucosa cutis (lupus verrucosus, prosector's wart, warty tuberculosis)Tuberculous cellulitisTuberculous gumma (metastatic tuberculous abscess, metastatic tuberculous ulcer)Tuberculoid leprosyMycosis-related cutaneous conditions are caused by fungi or yeasts,
pulmonary histoplasmosisProgressive disseminated histoplasmosisProximal subungual onychomycosisRhinosporidiosisSouth American blastomycosis (Brazilian blastomycosis, paracoccidioidal granuloma, paracoccidioidomycosis)Sporotrichosis (rose-gardener's disease)Systemic candidiasisTinea barbae (barber's itch, ringworm of the beard, tinea sycosis) Tinea capitis (herpes tonsurans, ringworm of the hair, ringworm of the scalp,
jock itch, ringworm of the groin)Tinea facieiTinea imbricata (tokelau)Tinea incognitoTinea manuumTinea nigra (superficial phaeohyphomycosis, tinea nigra palmaris et plantaris)Tinea pedis (athlete's foot, ringworm of the foot)Tinea versicolor (dermatomycosis furfuracea, pityriasis versicolor, tinea flava)White piedraWhite superficial onychomycosisZygomycosis (phycomycosis)Parasitic infestations, stings, and
dermatomycosis furfuracea, pityriasis versicolor, tinea flava)White piedraWhite superficial onychomycosisZygomycosis (phycomycosis)Parasitic infestations, stings, and bites in humans are caused by several groups of organisms belonging to the following phyla: Annelida, Arthropoda, Bryozoa, Chordata, Cnidaria, Cyanobacteria, Echinodermata, Nemathelminthes, Platyhelminthes, and
: Annelida, Arthropoda, Bryozoa, Chordata, Cnidaria, Cyanobacteria, Echinodermata, Nemathelminthes, Platyhelminthes, and Protozoa.Acanthamoeba infectionAmebiasis cutisAnt stingArachnidismBaker's itchBalamuthia infectionBedbug infestation (bedbug bite, cimicosis)Bee and wasp stingsBlister beetle dermatitisBombardier beetle burnBristleworm sting Centipede biteCheyletiella dermatitisChigger biteCoolie itchCopra itchCoral dermatitisCreeping eruption (cutaneous
infection)Erisipela de la costaFeather pillow dermatitisFunnel web spider biteGamasoidosisGnathostomiasis (larva migrans profundus)Grain itch (barley itch, mattress itch, prairie itch, straw itch)Grocer's itchHead lice infestation (cooties, pediculosis capitis)Hookworm disease (ancylostomiasis, ground itch, necatoriasis, uncinariasis)Human trypanosomiasisHydroid dermatitisIrukandji syndromeJellyfish dermatitisKed itchLarva currensLatrodectism (widow
azar dermal leishmaniasis (post-kala-azar dermatosis)ProtothecosisPulicosis (flea bites)Reduviid biteScabies (itch mite infestation, seven-year itch)Scorpion stingSea anemone dermatitisSeabather's eruption (sea lice)Sea urchin injurySeaweed dermatitisSnake biteSowdaSparganosisSpider biteStingray injurySwimmer's itch (cercarial dermatitis, schistosome cercarial dermatitis) Tarantula biteTick biteToxoplasmosisTrichinosisTrichomoniasisTungiasis (bicho de
flea bites)Reduviid biteScabies (itch mite infestation, seven-year itch)Scorpion stingSea anemone dermatitisSeabather's eruption (sea lice)Sea urchin injurySeaweed dermatitisSnake biteSowdaSparganosisSpider biteStingray injurySwimmer's itch (cercarial dermatitis, schistosome cercarial dermatitis) Tarantula biteTick biteToxoplasmosisTrichinosisTrichomoniasisTungiasis (bicho de pie, chigoe flea bite, jigger bite, nigua,
, pique)Visceral leishmaniasis (dumdum fever, kala-azar)Visceral schistosomiasis (bilharziasis)Viscerotropic leishmaniasisWheat warehouse itchVirus-related cutaneous conditions are caused by two main groups of viruses–DNA and RNA types–both of which are obligatory intracellular parasites.Alphavirus infectionAsymmetric periflexural exanthem of childhood (unilateral laterothoracic exanthem)B virus
are caused by two main groups of viruses–DNA and RNA types–both of which are obligatory intracellular parasites.Alphavirus infectionAsymmetric periflexural exanthem of childhood (unilateral laterothoracic exanthem)B virus infectionBoston exanthem diseaseBovine papular stomatitisBowenoid papulosisBuffalopoxButcher's wartChikungunya feverCondylomata acuminataCongenital rubella syndromeCowpoxCytomegalic inclusion diseaseDengue (Break-bone fever)Disseminated herpes
primary HIV infection (acute retroviral syndrome)Farmyard poxGeneralized vacciniaGenital herpes (herpes genitalis, herpes progenitalis)Gianotti–Crosti syndrome (infantile papular acrodermatitis, papular acrodermatitis of childhood, papulovesicular acrolocated syndrome)Giant condyloma acuminatum (Buschke–Löwenstein tumor, giant condyloma of Buschke–Löwenstein tumor)Hand-foot-and-mouth
ruber moniliformisLichen sclerosus (lichen sclerosus et atrophicus)Lichen striatus (Blaschko linear acquired inflammatory skin eruption, linear lichenoid dermatosis)Lichen verrucosus et reticularisLichenoid trikeratosisLichenoid dermatitisLichenoid reaction of graft-versus-host diseaseLinear lichen planusMucosal lichen planusPeno-gingival syndromeUlcerative lichen planusVulvovaginal gingival syndromeVulvovaginal lichen planusLymphoid-related cutaneous conditions are a group
graft-versus-host diseaseLinear lichen planusMucosal lichen planusPeno-gingival syndromeUlcerative lichen planusVulvovaginal gingival syndromeVulvovaginal lichen planusLymphoid-related cutaneous conditions are a group of disorders characterized by collections of lymphocyte cells within the skin.Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphomaAngiocentric lymphoma (extranodal natural killer cell lymphoma,
diseaseLinear lichen planusMucosal lichen planusPeno-gingival syndromeUlcerative lichen planusVulvovaginal gingival syndromeVulvovaginal lichen planusLymphoid-related cutaneous conditions are a group of disorders characterized by collections of lymphocyte cells within the skin.Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphomaAngiocentric lymphoma (extranodal natural killer cell lymphoma, nasal-type NK lymphoma
Down syndromeMelanocytic nevi and neoplasms are caused by either a proliferation of (1) melanocytes, or (2) nevus cells, a form of melanocyte that lack dendritic processes.Acral nevus (melanocytic nevus of acral skin, melanocytic nevus with intraepidermal ascent of cells)Amelanotic blue nevus (hypomelanotic
, giant hairy nevus, nevus pigmentosus et pilosus)Halo nevus (leukoderma acquisitum centrifugum, perinevoid vitiligo, Sutton nevus)Hori's nevus (acquired bilateral nevus of Ota-like macules)Inherited patterned lentiginosis in black personsInk spot lentigo (sunburn lentigo)Laugier–Hunziker syndromeLentigo simplex (simple lentigo)Malignant blue nevusMedium-sized congenital
spindle cell nevus, Spitz's juvenile melanoma)Solar lentigo (lentigo senilis, liver spot, old age spot, senile freckle)Melanoma is a malignant proliferation of melanocytes and the most aggressive type of skin cancer.Acral lentiginous melanoma Amelanotic melanomaAnimal-type melanomaDesmoplastic melanoma (neurotropic melanoma, spindled melanoma)Lentigo maligna
melanoma)Solar lentigo (lentigo senilis, liver spot, old age spot, senile freckle)Melanoma is a malignant proliferation of melanocytes and the most aggressive type of skin cancer.Acral lentiginous melanoma Amelanotic melanomaAnimal-type melanomaDesmoplastic melanoma (neurotropic melanoma, spindled melanoma)Lentigo maligna (lentiginous melanoma on sun-damaged
, pseudorheumatoid nodule)Subcutaneous sarcoidosis (Darier–Roussy disease, Darier–Roussy sarcoid)Systemic sarcoidosisUlcerative sarcoidosisXanthoma disseminatum (disseminated xanthosiderohistiocytosis, Montgomery syndrome)Mucinoses are a group of conditions caused by dermal fibroblasts producing abnormally large amounts of mucopolysaccharides.Acral persistent papular mucinosisAtypical lichen myxedematosus (intermediate lichen myxedematosus)Atypical tuberous myxedema (Jadassohn
Darier–Roussy sarcoid)Systemic sarcoidosisUlcerative sarcoidosisXanthoma disseminatum (disseminated xanthosiderohistiocytosis, Montgomery syndrome)Mucinoses are a group of conditions caused by dermal fibroblasts producing abnormally large amounts of mucopolysaccharides.Acral persistent papular mucinosisAtypical lichen myxedematosus (intermediate lichen myxedematosus)Atypical tuberous myxedema (Jadassohn–Dosseker syndrome)Cutaneous focal mucinosisCutaneous lupus mucinosis (papular and
myxedematosusMyxoid cyst (digital mucous cyst, mucous cyst)Myxoid lipoblastomaNeuropathia mucinosa cutaneaNodular lichen myxedematosusPapular mucinosis (generalized lichen myxedematosus, sclerodermoid lichen myxedematosus, scleromyxedema)Papular mucinosis of infancy (cutaneous mucinosis of infancy)Perifollicular mucinosisReticular erythematous mucinosis (midline mucinosis, plaque-like cutaneous mucinosis, REM syndrome)SclerodermaSelf-healing juvenile cutaneous mucinosisSelf
chronic pain syndromeBody dysmorphic disorder (dysmorphic syndrome, dysmorphophobia)Brachioradial pruritusBromidrosiphobiaComplex regional pain syndrome (reflex sympathetic dystrophy)Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosisDelusional parasitosis (delusions of parasitosis, Ekbom syndrome, monosymptomatic hypochondriacal psychosis)DermatothlasiaFactitious dermatitis (dermatitis artefacta, factitial dermatitis) Glossodynia (burning mouth syndrome, burning tongue, orodynia)Levator
(alymphocytosis, Glanzmann–Riniker syndrome, severe mixed immunodeficiency syndrome, thymic alymphoplasia)Shwachman–Bodian–Diamond syndromeThymoma with immunodeficiency (Good syndrome)Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancyWarts–hypogammaglobulinemia–infections–myelokathexis syndrome (WHIM syndrome)Wiskott–Aldrich syndromeX-linked agammaglobulinemia (Bruton syndrome, sex-linked agammaglobulinemia)X-
right ventricular cardiomyopathy of Naxos, Naxos disease)Olmsted syndrome (mutilating palmoplantar keratoderma with periorificial keratotic plaques, mutilating palmoplantar keratoderma with periorificial plaques, polykeratosis of Touraine)Pachyonychia congenita type I (Jadassohn–Lewandowsky syndrome)Pachyonychia congenita type II (Jackson–Lawler pachyonychia congenita, Jackson–Sertoli syndrome)Palmoplantar keratoderma and spastic
syndrome)Vohwinkel syndrome (keratoderma hereditaria mutilans, keratoma hereditaria mutilans, mutilating keratoderma of Vohwinkel, mutilating palmoplantar keratoderma)Pregnancy-related cutaneous conditions are a group of skin changes observed during pregnancy.Impetigo herpetiformisIntrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (cholestasis of pregnancy, jaundice of pregnancy, obstetric cholestasis, prurigo gravidarum)Linea nigraPemphigoid
, mutilating keratoderma of Vohwinkel, mutilating palmoplantar keratoderma)Pregnancy-related cutaneous conditions are a group of skin changes observed during pregnancy.Impetigo herpetiformisIntrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (cholestasis of pregnancy, jaundice of pregnancy, obstetric cholestasis, prurigo gravidarum)Linea nigraPemphigoid gestationis (gestational pemphigoid, herpes gestationis)Prurigo gestationis (Besnier
Vohwinkel, mutilating palmoplantar keratoderma)Pregnancy-related cutaneous conditions are a group of skin changes observed during pregnancy.Impetigo herpetiformisIntrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (cholestasis of pregnancy, jaundice of pregnancy, obstetric cholestasis, prurigo gravidarum)Linea nigraPemphigoid gestationis (gestational pemphigoid, herpes gestationis)Prurigo gestationis (Besnier prurigo, early-
keratoderma)Pregnancy-related cutaneous conditions are a group of skin changes observed during pregnancy.Impetigo herpetiformisIntrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (cholestasis of pregnancy, jaundice of pregnancy, obstetric cholestasis, prurigo gravidarum)Linea nigraPemphigoid gestationis (gestational pemphigoid, herpes gestationis)Prurigo gestationis (Besnier prurigo, early-onset prurigo of pregnancy
jaundice of pregnancy, obstetric cholestasis, prurigo gravidarum)Linea nigraPemphigoid gestationis (gestational pemphigoid, herpes gestationis)Prurigo gestationis (Besnier prurigo, early-onset prurigo of pregnancy, linear IgM dermatosis of pregnancy, papular dermatitis of pregnancy, prurigo of pregnancy, Spangler's papular dermatitis of pregnancy)Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancyPruritic
, prurigo gravidarum)Linea nigraPemphigoid gestationis (gestational pemphigoid, herpes gestationis)Prurigo gestationis (Besnier prurigo, early-onset prurigo of pregnancy, linear IgM dermatosis of pregnancy, papular dermatitis of pregnancy, prurigo of pregnancy, Spangler's papular dermatitis of pregnancy)Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancyPruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy
(gestational pemphigoid, herpes gestationis)Prurigo gestationis (Besnier prurigo, early-onset prurigo of pregnancy, linear IgM dermatosis of pregnancy, papular dermatitis of pregnancy, prurigo of pregnancy, Spangler's papular dermatitis of pregnancy)Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancyPruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (late-onset prurigo
herpes gestationis)Prurigo gestationis (Besnier prurigo, early-onset prurigo of pregnancy, linear IgM dermatosis of pregnancy, papular dermatitis of pregnancy, prurigo of pregnancy, Spangler's papular dermatitis of pregnancy)Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancyPruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (late-onset prurigo of pregnancy, polymorphic
dermatosis of pregnancy, papular dermatitis of pregnancy, prurigo of pregnancy, Spangler's papular dermatitis of pregnancy)Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancyPruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (late-onset prurigo of pregnancy, polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, PUPPP syndrome, toxemic rash of pregnancy, toxic erythema of pregnancy)Striae
pregnancy, prurigo of pregnancy, Spangler's papular dermatitis of pregnancy)Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancyPruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (late-onset prurigo of pregnancy, polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, PUPPP syndrome, toxemic rash of pregnancy, toxic erythema of pregnancy)Striae gravidarumPruritus, commonly known as itchiness,
, Spangler's papular dermatitis of pregnancy)Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancyPruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (late-onset prurigo of pregnancy, polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, PUPPP syndrome, toxemic rash of pregnancy, toxic erythema of pregnancy)Striae gravidarumPruritus, commonly known as itchiness, is a sensation exclusive to
of pregnancyPruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (late-onset prurigo of pregnancy, polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, PUPPP syndrome, toxemic rash of pregnancy, toxic erythema of pregnancy)Striae gravidarumPruritus, commonly known as itchiness, is a sensation exclusive to the skin, and characteristic of many skin
plaques of pregnancy (late-onset prurigo of pregnancy, polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, PUPPP syndrome, toxemic rash of pregnancy, toxic erythema of pregnancy)Striae gravidarumPruritus, commonly known as itchiness, is a sensation exclusive to the skin, and characteristic of many skin conditions.Adult blaschkitisAquadyniaAquagenic pruritusBiliary
chronic stationary psoriasis, plaque-like psoriasis)Psoriatic arthritisPsoriatic erythroderma (erythrodermic psoriasis)Seborrheic-like psoriasis (sebopsoriasis, seborrhiasis)Reactive neutrophilic cutaneous conditions constitute a spectrum of disease mediated by neutrophils, and typically associated with underlying diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease and hematologic malignancy.Acute erythema nodosumBowel-associated
vasculitis of the dorsal hands)Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitisPyoderma gangrenosumPyogenic arthritis–pyoderma gangrenosum–acne syndrome (PAPA syndrome)Rheumatoid neutrophilic dermatitis (rheumatoid neutrophilic dermatosis)Superficial granulomatous pyodermaSweet's syndrome (acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis)Sweet's syndrome-like dermatosisVesicopustular dermatosisRecalcitrant palmoplantar eruptions are skin conditions of the palms and soles which are resistant to
gangrenosumPyogenic arthritis–pyoderma gangrenosum–acne syndrome (PAPA syndrome)Rheumatoid neutrophilic dermatitis (rheumatoid neutrophilic dermatosis)Superficial granulomatous pyodermaSweet's syndrome (acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis)Sweet's syndrome-like dermatosisVesicopustular dermatosisRecalcitrant palmoplantar eruptions are skin conditions of the palms and soles which are resistant to treatment.Dermatitis repens (acrodermatitis continua
acrodermatitis)Infantile acropustulosis (acropustulosis of infancy)Palmoplantar pustulosis (persistent palmoplantar pustulosis, pustular psoriasis of the Barber type, pustular psoriasis of the extremities, pustulosis of palms and soles, pustulosis palmaris et plantaris)Pustular bacteridSkin conditions resulting from errors in metabolism are caused by enzymatic defects that lead to an accumulation or
autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy syndrome (CADASIL syndrome)Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosisCitrullinemiaCongenital erythropoietic porphyria (Gunther's disease)Diabetic bulla (bullosis diabeticorum, bullous eruption of diabetes mellitus)Diabetic cheiroarthropathyDiabetic dermopathy (shin spots)Dystrophic calcinosis cutisEruptive xanthomaErythropoietic protoporphyria Fabry disease (Anderson–Fabry disease, angiokeratoma corporis diffusum)Familial alpha-lipoprotein deficiency
combined hyperlipidemia (multiple-type hyperlipoproteinemia)Familial defective apolipoprotein B-100Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia (broad beta disease, remnant removal disease)Familial hypertriglyceridemiaFarber disease (fibrocytic dysmucopolysaccharidosis, lipogranulomatosis)FucosidosisGaucher's diseaseGout (podagra, urate crystal arthropathy, urate deposition disease)Hartnup disease (pellagra-like dermatosis)Hemodialysis-associated amyloidosisHepatoerythropoietic porphyriaHereditary coproporphyriaHereditary gelsolin amyloidosisHeredofamilial amyloidosisHunter syndromeHurler
Wiethe disease)Lipoprotein lipase deficiency (chylomicronemia, chylomicronemia syndrome)Macular amyloidosis Maroteaux–Lamy syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis type VI)Medication-induced hyperlipoproteinemiaMetastatic calcinosis cutisMilia-like calcinosisMorquio's disease (mucopolysaccharidosis type IV)Necrobiosis lipoidica (necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum)Niemann–Pick diseaseNodular amyloidosisNodular xanthomaNormolipoproteinemic xanthomatosisObstructive liver disease (xanthomatous biliary cirrhosis)OchronosisOsteoma cutisPalmar xanthomaPhenylketonuriaPhytosterolemia (sitosterolemia)Porphyria
mucopolysaccharidosis type I S)Secondary cutaneous amyloidosisSecondary systemic amyloidosisSialidosisSly syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis type VII)Subepidermal calcified nodule (solitary congenital nodular calcification, Winer's nodular calcinosis)Transient erythroporphyria of infancy (purpuric phototherapy-induced eruption) Traumatic calcinosis cutisTuberoeruptive xanthoma (tuberous xanthoma)Tumoral calcinosisVariegate porphyria (mixed hepatic porphyria, mixed porphyria, South
calcinosis cutisTuberoeruptive xanthoma (tuberous xanthoma)Tumoral calcinosisVariegate porphyria (mixed hepatic porphyria, mixed porphyria, South African genetic porphyria, South African porphyria)Verruciform xanthomaWaxy skinWilson's disease (hepatolenticular degeneration)Xanthelasma palpebrarum (xanthelasma)Xanthoma diabeticorumXanthoma planum (plane xanthoma)Xanthoma striatum palmareXanthoma tendinosum (tendinous xanthoma)Xanthoma tuberosumSkin conditions resulting from physical factors occur from
hepatolenticular degeneration)Xanthelasma palpebrarum (xanthelasma)Xanthoma diabeticorumXanthoma planum (plane xanthoma)Xanthoma striatum palmareXanthoma tendinosum (tendinous xanthoma)Xanthoma tuberosumSkin conditions resulting from physical factors occur from a number of causes, including, but not limited to, hot and cold temperatures, friction, and moisture.AbrasionAcrocyanosisActinic prurigo (familial polymorphous light eruption
syndrome)Erythrocyanosis crurumFavre–Racouchot syndrome (Favre–Racouchot disease, nodular cutaneous elastosis with cysts and comedones)Foreign body reactionFracture blisterFriction blisterFrostbiteGarrod's pad (violinist's viola pad)Harpist's fingerHeel stick woundHeat edemaHot tar burnHunan hand syndrome (chili burn)Hydroa vacciniforme (Bazin's hydroa vacciniforme)Jogger's nippleJuvenile spring eruptionKairo cancerKang cancerKangri
Racouchot syndrome (Favre–Racouchot disease, nodular cutaneous elastosis with cysts and comedones)Foreign body reactionFracture blisterFriction blisterFrostbiteGarrod's pad (violinist's viola pad)Harpist's fingerHeel stick woundHeat edemaHot tar burnHunan hand syndrome (chili burn)Hydroa vacciniforme (Bazin's hydroa vacciniforme)Jogger's nippleJuvenile spring eruptionKairo cancerKang cancerKangri ulcerLightning burnLoop markMagnetic
(decubitus ulcer)Pseudoacanthosis nigricansPseudoverrucous papules and nodulesPulling boat handsPUVA-induced acrobullous dermatosisRunner's rumpSclerosing lymphangiitisSilica granulomaSilicone granulomaSkin pop scarSkin trackSlap markSolar erythemaSoot tattooSubcutaneous emphysemaSucking blisterSunburnSurfer's knotsTattooTennis toeThermal burnTraumatic asphyxiaTrench footTropical anhidrotic astheniaTropical immersion foot (paddy foot, paddy-field foot)Turf toeUranium dermatosisUV-sensitive syndromeVibration white finger (dead
reactionRadiation-induced erythema multiformeRadiation-induced hypertrophic scarRadiation-induced keloidRadiation-induced morpheaUrticaria is a vascular reaction of the skin characterized by the appearance of wheals, which are firm, elevated swelling of the skin. Angioedema, which can occur alone or withurticaria, is characterized by a well
dermis, or lymphatics in the subcutaneous tissues.Aagenaes syndromeAcroangiodermatitis (acroangiodermatitis of Mali, Mali acroangiodermatitis, Pseudo-Kaposi's sarcoma)AcrocyanosisAcute hemorrhagic edema of infancy (acute hemorrhagic edema of childhood, Finkelstein's disease, infantile postinfectious iris-like purpura and edema, medallion-like purpura,
subcutaneous tissues.Aagenaes syndromeAcroangiodermatitis (acroangiodermatitis of Mali, Mali acroangiodermatitis, Pseudo-Kaposi's sarcoma)AcrocyanosisAcute hemorrhagic edema of infancy (acute hemorrhagic edema of childhood, Finkelstein's disease, infantile postinfectious iris-like purpura and edema, medallion-like purpura, purpura en cocarde avec oedema,
lymphangiosarcoma (Stewart–Treves syndrome)Purpura fulminans (purpura gangrenosa)Purpura secondary to clotting disordersPurpuric agave dermatitis Raynaud phenomenonRaynaud's disease (primary Raynaud's phenomenon)Reactive angioendotheliomatosisSchamberg's disease (progressive pigmentary dermatosis of Schamberg, purpura pigmentosa progressiva, Schamberg's purpura)Secondary lymphedemaSeptic thrombophlebitisSinusoidal hemangiomaSneddon's syndrome (idiopathic livedo reticularis with cerebrovascular
disease)Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger's disease)Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (Moschcowitz syndrome)Traumatic purpuraTrousseau's syndromeUnilateral nevoid telangiectasia (nevoid telangiectasia)Urticarial vasculitis (chronic urticaria as a manifestation of venulitis, hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis syndrome, hypocomplementemic vasculitis, unusual lupus-like syndrome)Venous insufficiency ulcerationWaldenström hyperglobulinemic purpura (purpura hyperglobulinemica)Waldenström macroglobulinemiaYellow nail syndrome (
, unusual lupus-like syndrome)Venous insufficiency ulcerationWaldenström hyperglobulinemic purpura (purpura hyperglobulinemica)Waldenström macroglobulinemiaYellow nail syndrome (primary lymphedema associated with yellow nails and pleural effusion)DermatologyList of conditions associated with café au lait maculesList of contact allergensList of cutaneous conditions associated with increased risk of nonmelanoma skin cancerList of cutaneous conditions associated with
hyperglobulinemic purpura (purpura hyperglobulinemica)Waldenström macroglobulinemiaYellow nail syndrome (primary lymphedema associated with yellow nails and pleural effusion)DermatologyList of conditions associated with café au lait maculesList of contact allergensList of cutaneous conditions associated with increased risk of nonmelanoma skin cancerList of cutaneous conditions associated with internal malignancyList of cutaneous conditions caused by mutations
mutations in keratinsList of cutaneous neoplasms associated with systemic syndromesList of cutaneous conditions caused by problems with junctional proteinsList of dental abnormalities associated with cutaneous conditionsList of genes mutated in cutaneous conditionsList of genes mutated in pigmented cutaneous lesionsList of histologic stains that aid in diagnosis of cutaneous conditionsList of human leukocyte antigen
associated with systemic syndromesList of cutaneous conditions caused by problems with junctional proteinsList of dental abnormalities associated with cutaneous conditionsList of genes mutated in cutaneous conditionsList of genes mutated in pigmented cutaneous lesionsList of histologic stains that aid in diagnosis of cutaneous conditionsList of human leukocyte antigen alleles associated with cutaneous conditionsList of
of genes mutated in pigmented cutaneous lesionsList of histologic stains that aid in diagnosis of cutaneous conditionsList of human leukocyte antigen alleles associated with cutaneous conditionsList of immunofluorescence findings for autoimmune bullous conditionsList of inclusion bodies that aid in diagnosis of cutaneous conditionsList of keratins expressed in the human integumentary systemList of migrating
of histologic stains that aid in diagnosis of cutaneous conditionsList of human leukocyte antigen alleles associated with cutaneous conditionsList of immunofluorescence findings for autoimmune bullous conditionsList of inclusion bodies that aid in diagnosis of cutaneous conditionsList of keratins expressed in the human integumentary systemList of migrating cutaneous conditionsList of mites associated with cutaneous
of human leukocyte antigen alleles associated with cutaneous conditionsList of immunofluorescence findings for autoimmune bullous conditionsList of inclusion bodies that aid in diagnosis of cutaneous conditionsList of keratins expressed in the human integumentary systemList of migrating cutaneous conditionsList of mites associated with cutaneous reactionsList of radiographic findings associated with cutaneous conditionsList of specialized
for autoimmune bullous conditionsList of inclusion bodies that aid in diagnosis of cutaneous conditionsList of keratins expressed in the human integumentary systemList of migrating cutaneous conditionsList of mites associated with cutaneous reactionsList of radiographic findings associated with cutaneous conditionsList of specialized glands within the human integumentary systemList of spiders associated with cutaneous reactionsList
systemList of migrating cutaneous conditionsList of mites associated with cutaneous reactionsList of radiographic findings associated with cutaneous conditionsList of specialized glands within the human integumentary systemList of spiders associated with cutaneous reactionsList of target antigens in pemphigoidList of target antigens in pemphigusList of verrucous carcinoma subtypesList of xanthoma variants associated with hyperlipoproteinemia subtypesSkin
mites associated with cutaneous reactionsList of radiographic findings associated with cutaneous conditionsList of specialized glands within the human integumentary systemList of spiders associated with cutaneous reactionsList of target antigens in pemphigoidList of target antigens in pemphigusList of verrucous carcinoma subtypesList of xanthoma variants associated with hyperlipoproteinemia subtypesSkin Disorders at CurlieAll the Internet -
of radiographic findings associated with cutaneous conditionsList of specialized glands within the human integumentary systemList of spiders associated with cutaneous reactionsList of target antigens in pemphigoidList of target antigens in pemphigusList of verrucous carcinoma subtypesList of xanthoma variants associated with hyperlipoproteinemia subtypesSkin Disorders at CurlieAll the Internet - Directory - Main/Health
glands within the human integumentary systemList of spiders associated with cutaneous reactionsList of target antigens in pemphigoidList of target antigens in pemphigusList of verrucous carcinoma subtypesList of xanthoma variants associated with hyperlipoproteinemia subtypesSkin Disorders at CurlieAll the Internet - Directory - Main/Health/Conditions_and_Diseases/Skin_DisordersImages in Clinical Dermatology at the

carcinoma, also called urothelial carcinoma, is a type of cancer that typically occurs in the urinary system. It is the most common type of bladder cancer and cancer of the ureter, urethra, and urachus. It accounts for 95% of bladder cancer cases.It is the
. It is the most common type of bladder cancer and cancer of the ureter, urethra, and urachus. It accounts for 95% of bladder cancer cases.It is the second most common type of kidney cancer, but accounts for only five to 10 percent of all primary
of the ureter, urethra, and urachus. It accounts for 95% of bladder cancer cases.It is the second most common type of kidney cancer, but accounts for only five to 10 percent of all primary renal malignant tumors.Transitional cell carcinomas arise from the transitional epithelium
to approximately one-half of the disease burden. Chemical exposure, such as those sustained by workers in the petroleum industry, the manufacture of paints and pigments (e.g., aniline dyes), and agrochemicals are known to predispose one to urothelial cancer. The risk is lowered by
may predispose to the development of transitional cell carcinomas (the latter especially with respect to the upper urinary tract).Radiation exposureSomatic mutation, such as deletion of chromosome 9q, 9p, 11p, 17p, 13q, 14q and overexpression of RAS (oncogene) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).Transitional
13q, 14q and overexpression of RAS (oncogene) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).Transitional cell carcinomas are often multifocal, with 30–40% of patients having more than one tumor at diagnosis. The pattern of growth of transitional cell carcinomas can be papillary, sessile, or carcinoma in
growth factor receptor (EGFR).Transitional cell carcinomas are often multifocal, with 30–40% of patients having more than one tumor at diagnosis. The pattern of growth of transitional cell carcinomas can be papillary, sessile, or carcinoma in situ. The most common site of transitional cell carcinoma metastasis outside
is often used to create either a "neo-bladder" or an "ileal conduit" which act as a place for the storage of urine before it is evacuated from the body either via the urethra or a urostomy respectively.First-line chemotherapy regimens for advanced or metastatic
or a urostomy respectively.First-line chemotherapy regimens for advanced or metastatic transitional cell carcinomas consists of gemcitabine and cisplatin) or a combination of methotrexate, vinblastine, adriamycin, and cisplatin.Taxanes or vinflunine have been used as second-line therapy (after progression on a platinum
has progressed despite treatment with GC or MVAC.In May 2016 FDA granted accelerated approval to atezolizumab for locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma treatment after failure of cisplatin-based chemotherapy. The confirmatory trial (to convert the accelerated approval into a full approval) failed to achieve its primary endpoint of
seen with neurofibromatosis type II.Source:severe headachevisual loss (due to papilledema)vomitingbilateral Babinski signdrowsiness (after several hours of the above symptoms)gait change (rotation of feet when walking)impaction/constipationback flexibilityEpendymomas are composed of cells with regular, round to oval nuclei.  There is a variably dense fibrillary background
glia, despite their name suggesting an ependymal origin.						Ependymomas make up about 5% of adult intracranial gliomas and up to 10% of childhood tumors of the central nervous system (CNS). Their occurrence seems to peak at age 5 years and then again at age 35
may also arise in the spinal cord, conus medullaris and supratentorial locations. Other symptoms can include (but are not limited to): loss of appetite, difficulty sleeping, temporary inability to distinguish colors, uncontrollable twitching, seeing vertical or horizontal lines when in bright light, and temporary
memory loss.  It should be remembered that these symptoms also are prevalent in many other illnesses not associated with ependymoma.About 10% of ependymomas are benign myxopapillary ependymoma (MPE). MPE is a localized and slow-growing low-grade tumor, which originates almost exclusively
ependymoma and the ependymoblastoma, are treated similarly to medulloblastoma but the prognosis is much less favorable. Malignant ependymomas may be treated with a combination of radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Ependymoblastomas, which occur in infants and children younger than 5 years of age, may spread through the cerebrospinal fluid
Malignant ependymomas may be treated with a combination of radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Ependymoblastomas, which occur in infants and children younger than 5 years of age, may spread through the cerebrospinal fluid and usually require radiation therapy. The subependymoma, a variant of the ependymoma, is apt to
to arise in the fourth ventricle but may occur in the septum pellucidum and the cervical spinal cord. It usually affects people over 40 years of age and more often affects men than women.Extraspinal ependymoma (EEP), also known as extradural ependymoma, may be an unusual form
age and more often affects men than women.Extraspinal ependymoma (EEP), also known as extradural ependymoma, may be an unusual form of teratoma or may be confused with a sacrococcygeal teratoma.Guidelines for initial management for ependymoma are maximum surgical resection followed by radiation. Chemotherapy is
reserved for special cases including young children and those with tumor present after resection. Prophylactic craniospinal irradiation is of variable use and is a source of controversy given that most recurrence occurs at the site of resection and therefore is of debatable efficacy. Confirmation of cerebrospinal infiltration warrants more expansive radiation
tumor present after resection. Prophylactic craniospinal irradiation is of variable use and is a source of controversy given that most recurrence occurs at the site of resection and therefore is of debatable efficacy. Confirmation of cerebrospinal infiltration warrants more expansive radiation fields. Prognosis of recurrence is poor and often indicates
most recurrence occurs at the site of resection and therefore is of debatable efficacy. Confirmation of cerebrospinal infiltration warrants more expansive radiation fields. Prognosis of recurrence is poor and often indicates palliative care to manage symptoms.Brain and Spinal Tumors: Hope Through Research (National Institute of Neurological Disorders
.Adenocarcinoma can arise from the Bartholin gland and present with a painful lump.Two main pathophysiological pathways are currently understood to contribute to development of vulvar cancer—human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and chronic inflammation or autoimmunity affecting the vulvar area.HPV DNA can be found in up
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and chronic inflammation or autoimmunity affecting the vulvar area.HPV DNA can be found in up to 87% of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) and 29% of invasive vulvar cancers; HPV 16 is the most commonly detected subtype in VIN and vulvar
largely related to the causal pathways above, involving exposure or infection with the HPV virus and/or acquired or innate auto-immunity.Increasing ageHistory of vulvar or cervical intraepithelial neoplasiaIncreased number of male sexual partnersPrior history pre-invasive or invasive cervical cancerHistory of cigarette smokingInfection with human immunodeficiency virus (
innate auto-immunity.Increasing ageHistory of vulvar or cervical intraepithelial neoplasiaIncreased number of male sexual partnersPrior history pre-invasive or invasive cervical cancerHistory of cigarette smokingInfection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)Vulvar lichen sclerosusImmunodeficiency syndromesNorthern European ancestryExamination of the vulva is part of the gynecologic evaluation and should include a
that squamous cell carcinoma accounts for approximately 75% of all vulvar cancers. These lesions originate from epidermal squamous cells, the most common type of skin cell. Carcinoma-in-situ is a precursor lesion of squamous cell cancer that does not invade through the basement membrane. There
Carcinoma-in-situ is a precursor lesion of squamous cell cancer that does not invade through the basement membrane. There are two types of precursor lesions:Usual-type vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (uVIN), which is associated with Human papillomavirus (HPV) and often affects younger
Basal cell carcinoma Basal cell carcinoma account for approximately 8% of all vulvar cancers. It typically affects women in the 7th and 8th decade of life. These tend to be slow-growing lesions on the labia majora but can occur anywhere on the vulva. Their behavior is similar
Cancer Institute has shown that it has been diagnosed in girls as young as 10 years and women up to 107 years.The underlying biology of vulvar melanoma differs significantly from skin melanomas and mutational analyses have shown that fewer harbor a BRAF mutation while KIT mutations are significantly more common in
that fewer harbor a BRAF mutation while KIT mutations are significantly more common in vulvar melanoma. This has a direct impact on the medical treatment of vulvar melanomas: BRAF-inhibitors that are commonly used in the treatment of skin melanomas, play a minor role in vulvar melanomas. However
vulvar melanoma. This has a direct impact on the medical treatment of vulvar melanomas: BRAF-inhibitors that are commonly used in the treatment of skin melanomas, play a minor role in vulvar melanomas. However, vulvar melanomas frequently express PD-L1 and Checkpoint inhibitors (including CTLA-4
In recurrent melanoma, tyrosine kinase inhibitors may be used in those patients with a KIT mutation.Based on histology, there are different subtypes of vulvar melanoma: superficial spreading, nodular, acral lentigous and amelanotic melanoma. Vulvar melanomas are unique in that they are staged using the AJCC
melanoma. Vulvar melanomas are unique in that they are staged using the AJCC cancer staging for melanoma instead of the FIGO staging system.Diagnosis of vulvar melanoma is often delayed and approximately 32% of women already have regional lymph node involvement or distant metastases at the time of diagnosis.
staged using the AJCC cancer staging for melanoma instead of the FIGO staging system.Diagnosis of vulvar melanoma is often delayed and approximately 32% of women already have regional lymph node involvement or distant metastases at the time of diagnosis. Lymph node metastases and high mitotic count are indicators of
.Diagnosis of vulvar melanoma is often delayed and approximately 32% of women already have regional lymph node involvement or distant metastases at the time of diagnosis. Lymph node metastases and high mitotic count are indicators of poor outcome. The overall prognosis is poor and significantly worse than in skin
. Bartholin gland carcinoma The Bartholin gland is a rare malignancy and usually occurs in women in their mid-sixties. Other lesions Other forms of vulvar cancer include invasive Extramammary Paget's disease, adenocarcinoma (of the Bartholin glands, for example) and sarcoma.Anatomical staging supplemented preclinical
1988.  FIGO’s revised TNM classification system uses tumor size (T), lymph node involvement (N) and presence or absence of metastasis (M) as criteria for staging. Stages I and II describe the early stages of vulvar cancer that still appear to be confined
involvement (N) and presence or absence of metastasis (M) as criteria for staging. Stages I and II describe the early stages of vulvar cancer that still appear to be confined to the site of origin. Stage III cancers include greater disease extension to neighboring tissues and inguinal
) as criteria for staging. Stages I and II describe the early stages of vulvar cancer that still appear to be confined to the site of origin. Stage III cancers include greater disease extension to neighboring tissues and inguinal lymph nodes on one side. Stage IV indicates metastatic disease to
and inguinal lymph nodes on one side. Stage IV indicates metastatic disease to inguinal nodes on both sides or distant metastases.Illustrations showing stages of vulvar cancer										Other cancerous lesions in the differential diagnosis include Paget's disease of the vulva and vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN). Non
vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN). Non-cancerous vulvar diseases include lichen sclerosus, squamous cell hyperplasia, and vulvar vestibulitis. A number of diseases cause infectious lesions including herpes genitalis, human papillomavirus, syphilis, chancroid, granuloma inguinale, and lymphogranuloma venereum.Surgery is a mainstay
diseases cause infectious lesions including herpes genitalis, human papillomavirus, syphilis, chancroid, granuloma inguinale, and lymphogranuloma venereum.Surgery is a mainstay of therapy depending on anatomical staging and is usually reserved for cancers that have not spread beyond the vulva. Surgery may involve a wide local excision
vulvectomy. Surgery is significantly more extensive when the cancer has spread to nearby organs such as the urethra, vagina, or rectum. Complications of surgery include wound infection, sexual dysfunction, edema and thrombosis, as well as lymphedema secondary to dissected lymph nodes.Sentinel lymph node (
aim of removing as few nodes as possible, decreasing the risk of adverse effects. Location of the sentinel node(s) may require the use of technetium(99m)-labeled nano-colloid, or a combination of technetium and 1% isosulfan blue dye, wherein the combination may reduce the number of women
decreasing the risk of adverse effects. Location of the sentinel node(s) may require the use of technetium(99m)-labeled nano-colloid, or a combination of technetium and 1% isosulfan blue dye, wherein the combination may reduce the number of women with "'missed"' groin node metastases
use of technetium(99m)-labeled nano-colloid, or a combination of technetium and 1% isosulfan blue dye, wherein the combination may reduce the number of women with "'missed"' groin node metastases compared with technetium only.Radiation therapy may be used in more advanced vulvar cancer cases
or after surgery. In early vulvar cancer, primary radiotherapy to the groin results in less morbidity but may be linked with a higher risk of groin recurrence and reduced survival compared to surgery. Chemotherapy is not usually used as primary treatment but may be used in advanced cases with spread
for patients with stage I lesions but decreases to 20% when pelvic lymph nodes are involved. Lymph node involvement is the most important predictor of prognosis.Prognosis depends on the stage of cancer, which refers the amount and spread of cancer in the body. The stages are broken
to 20% when pelvic lymph nodes are involved. Lymph node involvement is the most important predictor of prognosis.Prognosis depends on the stage of cancer, which refers the amount and spread of cancer in the body. The stages are broken into 4 categories. Stage one also called
. Lymph node involvement is the most important predictor of prognosis.Prognosis depends on the stage of cancer, which refers the amount and spread of cancer in the body. The stages are broken into 4 categories. Stage one also called "localized" and is when the cancer is
2012. In the United Kingdom 7 out of 10 vulval cancer patients have major surgical resection as part of their cancer treatment. 22% of patients use radiotherapy and only 7% use chemotherapy as a treatment plan. There are very high survival rates, patients diagnosed with vulvar cancer
year, a 64% chance of living at least 5 years and a 53% chance of living ten or more years. The rate of survival increases dependent on age of patient and the stage the cancer was found in.In the United States, it newly occurred in about
of living at least 5 years and a 53% chance of living ten or more years. The rate of survival increases dependent on age of patient and the stage the cancer was found in.In the United States, it newly occurred in about 6,070 people with 1,280 deaths a
Symptoms range from isolated bone lesions to multisystem disease.Symptoms range from isolated bone lesions to multisystem disease. LCH is part of a group of syndromes called histiocytoses, which are characterized by an abnormal proliferation of histiocytes (an archaic term for activated dendritic cells and macrophages). These
from isolated bone lesions to multisystem disease. LCH is part of a group of syndromes called histiocytoses, which are characterized by an abnormal proliferation of histiocytes (an archaic term for activated dendritic cells and macrophages). These diseases are related to other forms of abnormal proliferation of white blood
birth) and histiocytosis X, until it was renamed in 1985 by the Histiocyte Society.The disease spectrum results from clonal accumulation and proliferation of cells resembling the epidermal dendritic cells called Langerhans cells, sometimes called dendritic cell histiocytosis. These cells in combination with lymphocytes, eosinophils, and
in combination with lymphocytes, eosinophils, and normal histiocytes form typical LCH lesions that can be found in almost any organ. A similar set of diseases has been described in canine histiocytic diseases.LCH is clinically divided into three groups: unifocal, multifocal unisystem, and multifocal multisystem.
found in the skin, lungs, or stomach. It can appear as a single lesion in an organ, up to a large quantity of lesions in one organ. When multiple lesions are scattered throughout an organ, it can be called a multifocal unisystem variety. When found in
be called a multifocal unisystem variety. When found in the lungs, it should be distinguished from Pulmonary Langerhans cell hystiocytosis—a special category of disease most commonly seen in adult smokers. When found in the skin it is called cutaneous single system Langerhans cell LCH. This version can
multifocal unisystem LCH is characterized by fever, bone lesions and diffuse eruptions, usually on the scalp and in the ear canals. 50% of cases involve the pituitary stalk, often leading to diabetes insipidus. The triad of diabetes insipidus, exophthalmos, and lytic bone lesions is known
on the scalp and in the ear canals. 50% of cases involve the pituitary stalk, often leading to diabetes insipidus. The triad of diabetes insipidus, exophthalmos, and lytic bone lesions is known as the Hand-Schüller-Christian triad. Peak onset is 2–10 years of
of diabetes insipidus, exophthalmos, and lytic bone lesions is known as the Hand-Schüller-Christian triad. Peak onset is 2–10 years of age.Multifocal multisystem LCH, also called Letterer-Siwe disease, is an often rapidly progressing disease in which Langerhans Cell cells proliferate in
histiocytosis (PLCH) is a unique form of LCH in that it occurs almost exclusively in cigarette smokers. It is now considered a form of smoking-related interstitial lung disease. PLCH develops when an abundance of monoclonal CD1a-positive Langerhans (immature histiocytes) proliferate the bronchioles and
. PLCH develops when an abundance of monoclonal CD1a-positive Langerhans (immature histiocytes) proliferate the bronchioles and alveolar interstitium, and this flood of histiocytes recruits granulocytes like eosinophils and neutrophils and agranulocytes like lymphocytes further destroying bronchioles and the interstitial alveolar space that can cause damage to the lungs
the special state of Langerhans cells that induce cytotoxic T-cell responses, and this is further supported by research that has shown an abundance of T-cells in early PLCH lesions that are CD4+ and present early activation markers. Some affected people recover completely after they stop smoking
extensive eruptions on the scalp.Bone marrow: Pancytopenia with superadded infection usually implies a poor prognosis. Anemia can be due to a number of factors and does not necessarily imply bone marrow infiltration.Lymph node: Enlargement of the liver in 20%, spleen in 30% and
imply bone marrow infiltration.Lymph node: Enlargement of the liver in 20%, spleen in 30% and lymph nodes in 50% of Histiocytosis cases.Endocrine glands: Hypothalamic pituitary axis  commonly involved. Diabetes insipidus is most common. Anterior pituitary hormone deficiency is usually permanent
usually permanent.Lungs: some patients are asymptomatic, diagnosed incidentally because of lung nodules on radiographs; others suffer from chronic cough and shortness of breath.Less frequently gastrointestinal tract, central nervous system, and oral cavity.The pathogenesis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a
.Less frequently gastrointestinal tract, central nervous system, and oral cavity.The pathogenesis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a matter of debate. There are ongoing investigations to determine whether LCH is a reactive (non-cancerous) or neoplastic (cancerous) process. Arguments
tissue, favorable prognosis and relatively good survival rate in patients without organ dysfunction or risk organ involvement.On the other hand, the infiltration of organs by monoclonal population of pathologic cells, and the successful treatment of subset of disseminated disease using chemotherapeutic regimens are all consistent with a neoplastic
dysfunction or risk organ involvement.On the other hand, the infiltration of organs by monoclonal population of pathologic cells, and the successful treatment of subset of disseminated disease using chemotherapeutic regimens are all consistent with a neoplastic process. In addition, a demonstration, using X chromosome–linked
DNA probes, of LCH as a monoclonal proliferation provided additional support for the neoplastic origin of this disease. While clonality is an important attribute of cancer, its presence does not prove that a proliferative process is neoplastic.  Recurrent cytogenetic or genomic abnormalities would also be required to demonstrate
this activating mutation could support the notion to characterize LCH as myeloproliferative disorder.Diagnosis is confirmed histologically by tissue biopsy. Hematoxylin-eosin stain of biopsy slide will show features of Langerhans Cell e.g. distinct cell margin, pink granular cytoplasm. Presence of Birbeck granules on electron microscopy and immuno
and High-resolution CT may show small, cavitated nodules with thin-walled cysts. MRI scan of the brain can show three groups of lesions such as tumourous/granulomatous lesions, nontumourous/granulomatous lesions, and atrophy. Tumourous lesions are usually found in the hypothalamic-pituitary
–restricted protein that induces the formation of Birbeck granules and is constitutively associated with them, is a highly specific marker.Guidelines for management of patients up to 18 years with Langerhans cell histiocytosis have been suggested. Treatment is guided by extent of disease. Solitary bone lesion may be
highly specific marker.Guidelines for management of patients up to 18 years with Langerhans cell histiocytosis have been suggested. Treatment is guided by extent of disease. Solitary bone lesion may be amenable through excision or limited radiation, dosage of 5-10 Gy for children, 24-30
remission and mortality is up to 10%.LCH usually affects children between 1 and 15 years old, with a peak incidence between 5 and 10 years of age.  Among children under the age of 10, yearly incidence is thought to be 1 in 200,000; and in adults even rarer
is slightly more than in females.LCH is usually a sporadic and non-hereditary condition but familial clustering has been noted in limited number of cases. Hashimoto-Pritzker disease is a congenital self-healing variant of Hand-Schüller-Christian disease.In the 10th episode of
of cases. Hashimoto-Pritzker disease is a congenital self-healing variant of Hand-Schüller-Christian disease.In the 10th episode of season 3 of House entitled "Merry Little Christmas", the primary patient is a girl with dwarfism who has a variety of symptoms,
10th episode of season 3 of House entitled "Merry Little Christmas", the primary patient is a girl with dwarfism who has a variety of symptoms, who is ultimately diagnosed with Langerhans cell histiocytosis.Also in the 5th episode, season 1 of "The Good Doctor",
the United States, an arbitrarily adopted standard of the ages used are 0–14 years inclusive, that is, up to 14 years 11.9 months of age. However, the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with
standard of the ages used are 0–14 years inclusive, that is, up to 14 years 11.9 months of age. However, the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in
years 11.9 months of age. However, the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in children.Worldwide, it is estimated that childhood cancer has an incidence of more than
the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in children.Worldwide, it is estimated that childhood cancer has an incidence of more than 175,000 per year, and a mortality rate
year, and a mortality rate of approximately 96,000 per year.  In developed countries, childhood cancer has a mortality of approximately 20% of cases. In low resource settings, on the other hand, mortality is approximately 80%, or even 90% in the world's
%, or even 90% in the world's poorest countries.  In many developed countries the incidence is slowly increasing, as rates of childhood cancer increased by 0.6% per year between 1975 and 2002 in the United States and by 1.1% per year between 1978 and 1997
the United States and by 1.1% per year between 1978 and 1997 in Europe. Unlike cancers in adults, which typically arise from years of DNA damage, childhood cancers are caused by a misappropriation of normal developmental processes.Children with cancer are at risk for developing various cognitive or
may be related to brain injury stemming from the cancer itself, such as a brain tumor or central nervous system metastasis or from side effects of cancer treatments such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy.  Studies have shown that chemo and radiation therapies may damage brain white matter and disrupt brain
special educational services at school if their cognitive learning disability affects their educational success.Familial and genetic factors are identified in 5-15% of childhood cancer cases. In <5-10% of cases, there are known environmental exposures and exogenous factors, such as prenatal exposure
their educational success.Familial and genetic factors are identified in 5-15% of childhood cancer cases. In <5-10% of cases, there are known environmental exposures and exogenous factors, such as prenatal exposure to tobacco, X-rays, or certain medications.
and exogenous factors, such as prenatal exposure to tobacco, X-rays, or certain medications. For the remaining 75-90% of cases, however, the individual causes remain unknown. In most cases, as in carcinogenesis in general, the cancers are assumed to involve
cases, as in carcinogenesis in general, the cancers are assumed to involve multiple risk factors and variables.Aspects that make the risk factors of childhood cancer different from those seen in adult cancers include:Different, and sometimes unique, exposures to environmental hazards. Children must often rely
Children must often rely on adults to protect them from toxic environmental agents.Immature physiological systems to clear or metabolize environmental substancesThe growth and development of children in phases known as "developmental windows" result in certain "critical windows of vulnerability".Also, a longer life expectancy in children
systems to clear or metabolize environmental substancesThe growth and development of children in phases known as "developmental windows" result in certain "critical windows of vulnerability".Also, a longer life expectancy in children avails for a longer time to manifest cancer processes with long latency periods, increasing the
with long latency periods, increasing the risk of developing some cancer types later in life.Advanced parental age has been associated with increased risk of childhood cancer in the offspring. There are preventable causes of childhood malignancy, such as delivery overuse and misuse of ionizing radiation through computed tomography
cancer types later in life.Advanced parental age has been associated with increased risk of childhood cancer in the offspring. There are preventable causes of childhood malignancy, such as delivery overuse and misuse of ionizing radiation through computed tomography scans when the test is not indicated or when adult protocols
brain tumors (18%), and lymphomas (11%). In 2005, 4.1 of every 100,000 young people under 20 years of age in the U.S. were diagnosed with leukemia, and 0.8 per 100,000 died from it. The number of new cases was highest among the
leukemia, and 0.8 per 100,000 died from it. The number of new cases was highest among the 1–4 age group, but the number of deaths was highest among the 10–14 age group.In 2005, 2.9 of every 100,000 people 0–19 years of age were found to have cancer
age group, but the number of deaths was highest among the 10–14 age group.In 2005, 2.9 of every 100,000 people 0–19 years of age were found to have cancer of the brain or central nervous system, and 0.7 per 100,000 died from it. These cancers were found
or central nervous system, and 0.7 per 100,000 died from it. These cancers were found most often in children between 1 and 4 years of age, but the most deaths occurred among those aged 5–9. The main subtypes of brain and central nervous system tumors in children are:
found most often in children between 1 and 4 years of age, but the most deaths occurred among those aged 5–9. The main subtypes of brain and central nervous system tumors in children are: astrocytoma, brain stem glioma, craniopharyngioma, desmoplastic infantile ganglioglioma, ependymoma, high-
%, many sites)Pleuropulmonary blastoma (lung or pleural cavity)Hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer)Adolescent and young adult oncology (AYA) is a branch of medicine that deals with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer in AYA patients aged 13–30. Studies have continuously shown that while pediatric
carcinoma (liver cancer)Adolescent and young adult oncology (AYA) is a branch of medicine that deals with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer in AYA patients aged 13–30. Studies have continuously shown that while pediatric cancer survival rates have gone up, the survival rate for adolescents
serve patients up to age 21. Additionally, AYAs face problems that adults and children rarely see including college concerns, fertility, and sense of aloneness. Studies have often shown that treating young adults with the same protocols used in pediatrics is more effective than adult oriented treatments.Childhood
Childhood cancers do not typically consist of tumors with clinically targetable oncogenes. Thus, treatment is frequently limited to chemoradiotherapy, which is a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The cytotoxicity of chemotherapy can result in immediate and long-term treatment-related comorbidities. For children undergoing treatment for
tumors with clinically targetable oncogenes. Thus, treatment is frequently limited to chemoradiotherapy, which is a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The cytotoxicity of chemotherapy can result in immediate and long-term treatment-related comorbidities. For children undergoing treatment for high-risk cancer, more than
for high-risk cancer, more than 80% experience life-threatening or fatal toxicity as a result of their treatment.Adult survivors of childhood cancer have some physical, psychological, and social difficulties.Premature heart disease is a major long-term complication in adult survivors of
of childhood cancer have some physical, psychological, and social difficulties.Premature heart disease is a major long-term complication in adult survivors of childhood cancer. Adult survivors are eight times more likely to die of heart disease than other people, and more than half of children treated
adult survivors of childhood cancer. Adult survivors are eight times more likely to die of heart disease than other people, and more than half of children treated for cancer develop some type of cardiac abnormality, although this may be asymptomatic or too mild to qualify for a clinical diagnosis of
of children treated for cancer develop some type of cardiac abnormality, although this may be asymptomatic or too mild to qualify for a clinical diagnosis of heart disease.Childhood cancer survivors are also at risk of developing adverse effects on the kidneys  and the liver. The risk of liver
diagnosis of heart disease.Childhood cancer survivors are also at risk of developing adverse effects on the kidneys  and the liver. The risk of liver late adverse effects in childhood cancer survivors is increased in those who have had radiotherapy to the liver and in people with factors such as
that sickens 6 to 7 children out of every 100,000 annually in parts of sub-Saharan Africa, where it is associated with a history of infection by both Epstein-Barr virus and malaria. In industrialized countries, Burkitt lymphoma is not associated with these infectious conditions.In the
In industrialized countries, Burkitt lymphoma is not associated with these infectious conditions.In the United States, cancer is the second most common cause of death among children between the ages of 1 and 14 years, exceeded only by accidents. More than 16 out of every 100,000 children and
, it was estimated that there was an incidence of 12,000 new cases, and 1,300 deaths, from cancer among children 0 to 14 years of age. Statistics from the 2014 American Cancer Society report:Ages birth to 14Ages 15 to 19Note: Incidence and mortality rates are per 1,000,000
Foundation focuses on finding less toxic and more effective treatments for pediatric cancers. This foundation works with 24 different hospitals across the US in search of treatments effective in practice. Childhood Cancer International is the largest global pediatric cancer foundation. It focuses on early access to care for childhood cancers
2010. Ways in which the foundations are helped by people include writing checks, collecting spare coins, bake/lemonade sales, donating portions of purchases from stores or restaurants, or Paid Time Off donations as well as auctions, bike rides, dance-a-thons. Additionally
it has a strong flexible body, quick reflexes, sharp teeth and retractable claws adapted to killing small prey. Its night vision and sense of smell are well developed. Cat communication includes vocalizations like meowing, purring, trilling, hissing, growling and grunting as well as cat-
kittens. Domestic cats are bred and shown at events as registered pedigreed cats, a hobby known as cat fancy. Failure to control breeding of pet cats by spaying and neutering, as well as abandonment of pets, resulted in large numbers of feral cats worldwide, contributing to the
pedigreed cats, a hobby known as cat fancy. Failure to control breeding of pet cats by spaying and neutering, as well as abandonment of pets, resulted in large numbers of feral cats worldwide, contributing to the extinction of entire bird, mammal, and reptile species, and
referred to as a kitten. In Early Modern English, the word kitten was interchangeable with the now-obsolete word catling. A group of cats can be referred to as a clowder or a glaring.The scientific name Felis catus was proposed by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 for a
Prionailurus bengalensis) was tamed independently in China around 5500 BC. This line of partially domesticated cats leaves no trace in the domestic cat populations of today.The earliest known indication for the taming of an African wildcat (F. lybica) was excavated close by a human Neolithic  grave
the house mouse (Mus musculus), and were tamed by Neolithic farmers. This commensal relationship between early farmers and tamed cats lasted thousands of years. As agricultural practices spread, so did tame and domesticated cats. Wildcats of Egypt contributed to the maternal gene pool of the domestic
have undergone only minor changes in anatomy and behavior, and they are still capable of surviving in the wild. Several natural behaviors and characteristics of wildcats may have pre-adapted them for domestication as pets. These traits include their small size, social nature, obvious body language,
may have pre-adapted them for domestication as pets. These traits include their small size, social nature, obvious body language, love of play and relatively high intelligence. Captive Leopardus cats may also display affectionate behavior toward humans, but were not domesticated. House cats often mate
with feral cats, producing hybrids such as the Kellas cat in Scotland. Hybridisation between domestic and other Felinae species is also possible.Development of cat breeds started in the mid 19th century.An analysis of the domestic cat genome revealed that the ancestral wildcat genome was significantly altered in
started in the mid 19th century.An analysis of the domestic cat genome revealed that the ancestral wildcat genome was significantly altered in the process of domestication, as specific mutations were selected to develop cat breeds. Most breeds are founded on random-bred domestic cats. Genetic diversity of
When it overpowers its prey, a cat delivers a lethal neck bite with its two long canine teeth, inserting them between two of the prey's vertebrae and severing its spinal cord, causing irreversible paralysis and death. Compared to other felines, domestic cats have narrowly spaced canine teeth relative
it overpowers its prey, a cat delivers a lethal neck bite with its two long canine teeth, inserting them between two of the prey's vertebrae and severing its spinal cord, causing irreversible paralysis and death. Compared to other felines, domestic cats have narrowly spaced canine teeth relative
and first molar together compose the carnassial pair on each side of the mouth, which efficiently shears meat into small pieces, like a pair of scissors. These are vital in feeding, since cats' small molars cannot chew food effectively, and cats are largely incapable of mastication
incapable of mastication. Although cats tend to have better teeth than most humans, with decay generally less likely because of a thicker protective layer of enamel, a less damaging saliva, less retention of food particles between teeth, and a diet mostly devoid of sugar, they are nonetheless
teeth than most humans, with decay generally less likely because of a thicker protective layer of enamel, a less damaging saliva, less retention of food particles between teeth, and a diet mostly devoid of sugar, they are nonetheless subject to occasional tooth loss and infection.The cat
.Cats have protractable and retractable claws. In their normal, relaxed position, the claws are sheathed with the skin and fur around the paw's toe pads. This keeps the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows the silent stalking of prey. The claws
Cats have protractable and retractable claws. In their normal, relaxed position, the claws are sheathed with the skin and fur around the paw's toe pads. This keeps the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows the silent stalking of prey. The claws
fur around the paw's toe pads. This keeps the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows the silent stalking of prey. The claws on the fore feet are typically sharper than those on the hind feet. Cats can voluntarily extend their claws on one
Cats have excellent night vision and can see at only one-sixth the light level required for human vision. This is partly the result of cat eyes having a tapetum lucidum, which reflects any light that passes through the retina back into the eye, thereby increasing the eye's
result of cat eyes having a tapetum lucidum, which reflects any light that passes through the retina back into the eye, thereby increasing the eye's sensitivity to dim light. Large pupils are an adaptation to dim light. The domestic cat has slit pupils, which allow it to focus
of cat eyes having a tapetum lucidum, which reflects any light that passes through the retina back into the eye, thereby increasing the eye's sensitivity to dim light. Large pupils are an adaptation to dim light. The domestic cat has slit pupils, which allow it to focus
light. The domestic cat has slit pupils, which allow it to focus bright light without chromatic aberration. At low light, a cat's pupils expand to cover most of the exposed surface of its eyes. However, the domestic cat has rather poor color vision and only two
expand to cover most of the exposed surface of its eyes. However, the domestic cat has rather poor color vision and only two types of cone cells, optimized for sensitivity to blue and yellowish green; its ability to distinguish between red and green is limited. A response to
red and green is limited. A response to middle wavelengths from a system other than the rod cells might be due to a third type of cone. However, this appears to be an adaptation to low light levels rather than representing true trichromatic vision.The domestic cat's hearing
type of cone. However, this appears to be an adaptation to low light levels rather than representing true trichromatic vision.The domestic cat's hearing is most acute in the range of 500 Hz to 32 kHz. It can detect an extremely broad range of frequencies ranging from 55
.The domestic cat's hearing is most acute in the range of 500 Hz to 32 kHz. It can detect an extremely broad range of frequencies ranging from 55 Hz to 79,000 Hz. It can hear a range of 10.5 octaves, while humans and dogs can hear ranges of
of a noise. It can detect ultrasound, which enables it to detect ultrasonic calls made by rodent prey.Cats have an acute sense of smell, due in part to their well-developed olfactory bulb and a large surface of olfactory mucosa, about 5.8 square centimetres (29⁄32
about twice that of humans. Cats and many other animals have a Jacobson's organ in their mouths that is used in the behavioral process of flehmening. It allows them to sense certain aromas in a way that humans cannot. Cats are sensitive to pheromones such as 3-
to plants that contain nepetalactone, especially catnip, as they can detect that substance at less than one part per billion. About 70–80% of cats are affected by nepetalactone. This response is also produced by other plants, such as silver vine (Actinidia polygama) and the herb
and sensation, cats have dozens of movable whiskers (vibrissae) over their body, especially their faces. These provide information on the width of gaps and on the location of objects in the dark, both by touching objects directly and by sensing air currents; they also trigger protective
of movable whiskers (vibrissae) over their body, especially their faces. These provide information on the width of gaps and on the location of objects in the dark, both by touching objects directly and by sensing air currents; they also trigger protective blink reflexes to protect the eyes
both by touching objects directly and by sensing air currents; they also trigger protective blink reflexes to protect the eyes from damage.Most breeds of cat have a noted fondness for sitting in high places, or perching. A higher place may serve as a concealed site from which to
During a fall from a high place, a cat reflexively twists its body and rights itself to land on its feet using its acute sense of balance and flexibility. This reflex is known as the cat righting reflex.A cat always rights itself in the same way during a fall
slightly more active at night. Domestic cats spend the majority of their time in the vicinity of their homes, but can range many hundreds of meters from this central point. They establish territories that vary considerably in size, in one study ranging from 7 to 28 hectares (17–69
. They establish territories that vary considerably in size, in one study ranging from 7 to 28 hectares (17–69 acres). The timing of cats' activity is quite flexible and varied, which means house cats may be more active in the morning and evening, as a response
greater human activity at these times.Cats conserve energy by sleeping more than most animals, especially as they grow older. The daily duration of sleep varies, usually between 12 and 16 hours, with 13 and 14 being the average. Some cats can sleep as much as 20
the average. Some cats can sleep as much as 20 hours. The term "cat nap" for a short rest refers to the cat's tendency to fall asleep (lightly) for a brief period. While asleep, cats experience short periods of rapid eye movement sleep often accompanied
average. Some cats can sleep as much as 20 hours. The term "cat nap" for a short rest refers to the cat's tendency to fall asleep (lightly) for a brief period. While asleep, cats experience short periods of rapid eye movement sleep often accompanied
cats, and cats may express great affection toward humans or other animals. Ethologically, the human keeper of a cat functions as a sort of surrogate for the cat's mother. Adult cats live their lives in a kind of extended kittenhood, a form of behavioral neoteny. Their
may express great affection toward humans or other animals. Ethologically, the human keeper of a cat functions as a sort of surrogate for the cat's mother. Adult cats live their lives in a kind of extended kittenhood, a form of behavioral neoteny. Their high-pitched sounds may
express great affection toward humans or other animals. Ethologically, the human keeper of a cat functions as a sort of surrogate for the cat's mother. Adult cats live their lives in a kind of extended kittenhood, a form of behavioral neoteny. Their high-pitched sounds may
pet cats are poorly socialized. In particular, older cats show aggressiveness towards newly arrived kittens, which include biting and scratching; this type of behavior is known as feline asocial aggression.Domestic cats' scent rubbing behavior towards humans or other cats is thought to be a feline means
.Domestic cats use many vocalizations for communication, including purring, trilling, hissing, growling/snarling, grunting, and several different forms of meowing. Their body language, including position of ears and tail, relaxation of the whole body, and kneading of the paws, are
including purring, trilling, hissing, growling/snarling, grunting, and several different forms of meowing. Their body language, including position of ears and tail, relaxation of the whole body, and kneading of the paws, are all indicators of mood. The tail and ears
Their body language, including position of ears and tail, relaxation of the whole body, and kneading of the paws, are all indicators of mood. The tail and ears are particularly important social signal mechanisms in cats. A raised tail indicates a friendly greeting, and flattened ears
social signal mechanisms in cats. A raised tail indicates a friendly greeting, and flattened ears indicates hostility. Tail-raising also indicates the cat's position in the group's social hierarchy, with dominant individuals raising their tails less often than subordinate ones. Feral cats are generally silent.
signal mechanisms in cats. A raised tail indicates a friendly greeting, and flattened ears indicates hostility. Tail-raising also indicates the cat's position in the group's social hierarchy, with dominant individuals raising their tails less often than subordinate ones. Feral cats are generally silent.
which is solicited by one of the cats raising and tilting its head.Purring may have developed as an evolutionary advantage as a signalling mechanism of reassurance between mother cats and nursing kittens. Post-nursing cats often purr as a sign of contentment: when being petted, becoming relaxed
as an evolutionary advantage as a signalling mechanism of reassurance between mother cats and nursing kittens. Post-nursing cats often purr as a sign of contentment: when being petted, becoming relaxed, or eating. The mechanism by which cats purr is elusive. The cat has no unique
purr is elusive. The cat has no unique anatomical feature that is clearly responsible for the sound.Cats are known for spending considerable amounts of time licking their coats to keep them clean. The cat's tongue has backwards-facing spines about 500 μm long, which are called
is clearly responsible for the sound.Cats are known for spending considerable amounts of time licking their coats to keep them clean. The cat's tongue has backwards-facing spines about 500 μm long, which are called papillae. These contain keratin which makes them rigid so the papillae
. These contain keratin which makes them rigid so the papillae act like a hairbrush. Some cats, particularly longhaired cats, occasionally regurgitate hairballs of fur that have collected in their stomachs from grooming. These clumps of fur are usually sausage-shaped and about 2–3 cm (3⁄4–1 1⁄4
a hairbrush. Some cats, particularly longhaired cats, occasionally regurgitate hairballs of fur that have collected in their stomachs from grooming. These clumps of fur are usually sausage-shaped and about 2–3 cm (3⁄4–1 1⁄4 in) long. Hairballs can be prevented with remedies that ease elimination
face and body with the forepaws as well as bites. Cats also throw themselves to the ground in a defensive posture to rake their opponent's belly with their powerful hind legs.Serious damage is rare, as the fights are usually short in duration, with the loser running away
mating rights are typically more severe and injuries may include deep puncture wounds and lacerations. Normally, serious injuries from fighting are limited to infections of scratches and bites, though these can occasionally kill cats if untreated. In addition, bites are probably the main route of transmission of feline
limited to infections of scratches and bites, though these can occasionally kill cats if untreated. In addition, bites are probably the main route of transmission of feline immunodeficiency virus. Sexually active males are usually involved in many fights during their lives, and often have decidedly battered faces with
fights during their lives, and often have decidedly battered faces with obvious scars and cuts to their ears and nose.The shape and structure of cats' cheeks is insufficient to suck. They lap with the tongue to draw liquid upwards into their mouths. Lapping at a rate of
corkscrew, drawing water upwards.Feral cats and free-fed house cats consume several small meals in a day. The frequency and size of meals varies between individuals. They select food based on its temperature, smell and texture; they dislike chilled foods and respond most strongly to
the amount and toxicity of the items eaten.Cats hunt small prey, primarily birds and rodents, and are often used as a form of pest control. Cats use two hunting strategies, either stalking prey actively, or waiting in ambush until an animal comes close enough to be
species in the area, with cats waiting in ambush outside burrows, but tending to actively stalk birds. Domestic cats are a major predator of wildlife in the United States, killing an estimated 1.4 to 3.7 billion birds and 6.9 to 20.7 billion mammals annually.Certain species appear more
1.4 to 3.7 billion birds and 6.9 to 20.7 billion mammals annually.Certain species appear more susceptible than others; for example, 30% of house sparrow mortality is linked to the domestic cat. In the recovery of ringed robins (Erithacus rubecula) and dunnocks (Prunella modularis)
is linked to the domestic cat. In the recovery of ringed robins (Erithacus rubecula) and dunnocks (Prunella modularis), 31% of deaths were a result of cat predation. In parts of North America, the presence of larger carnivores such as coyotes which prey on cats
cat. In the recovery of ringed robins (Erithacus rubecula) and dunnocks (Prunella modularis), 31% of deaths were a result of cat predation. In parts of North America, the presence of larger carnivores such as coyotes which prey on cats and other small predators reduces
. In parts of North America, the presence of larger carnivores such as coyotes which prey on cats and other small predators reduces the effect of predation by cats and other small predators such as opossums and raccoons on bird numbers and variety.Perhaps the best-known element of cats
effect of predation by cats and other small predators such as opossums and raccoons on bird numbers and variety.Perhaps the best-known element of cats' hunting behavior, which is commonly misunderstood and often appalls cat owners because it looks like torture, is that cats often appear to
is due to an instinctive imperative to ensure that the prey is weak enough to be killed without endangering the cat.Another poorly understood element of cat hunting behavior is the presentation of prey to human guardians. One explanation is that cats adopt humans into their social group and share excess
ensure that the prey is weak enough to be killed without endangering the cat.Another poorly understood element of cat hunting behavior is the presentation of prey to human guardians. One explanation is that cats adopt humans into their social group and share excess kill with others in the group according
home prey, despite males having negligible involvement in raising kittens.On islands, birds can contribute as much as 60% of a cat's diet. In nearly all cases, however, the cat cannot be identified as the sole cause for reducing the numbers of island birds
a cat's diet. In nearly all cases, however, the cat cannot be identified as the sole cause for reducing the numbers of island birds, and in some instances, eradication of cats has caused a "mesopredator release" effect; where the suppression of top carnivores
however, the cat cannot be identified as the sole cause for reducing the numbers of island birds, and in some instances, eradication of cats has caused a "mesopredator release" effect; where the suppression of top carnivores creates an abundance of smaller predators that cause a severe
In the US, feral and free-ranging domestic cats kill an estimated 6.3 – 22.3 billion mammals annually.In Australia, the impact of cats on mammal populations is even greater than the impact of habitat loss. More than one million reptiles are killed by feral cats each day
kill an estimated 6.3 – 22.3 billion mammals annually.In Australia, the impact of cats on mammal populations is even greater than the impact of habitat loss. More than one million reptiles are killed by feral cats each day, representing 258 species. Cats have contributed to the extinction
to the extinction of the Navassa curly-tailed lizard and Chioninia coctei.Domestic cats, especially young kittens, are known for their love of play. This behavior mimics hunting and is important in helping kittens learn to stalk, capture, and kill prey. Cats also engage in
with before. String is often used as a toy, but if it is eaten, it can become caught at the base of the cat's tongue and then move into the intestines, a medical emergency which can cause serious illness, even death. Owing to the risks posed by
before. String is often used as a toy, but if it is eaten, it can become caught at the base of the cat's tongue and then move into the intestines, a medical emergency which can cause serious illness, even death. Owing to the risks posed by
can cause serious illness, even death. Owing to the risks posed by cats eating string, it is sometimes replaced with a laser pointer's dot, which cats may chase.Female cats, called queens, are polyestrous with several estrus cycles during a year, lasting usually 21
, the female allows the male to mate. The female utters a loud yowl as the male pulls out of her because a male cat's penis has a band of about 120–150 backward-pointing penile spines, which are about 1 mm (1⁄32 in) long; upon withdrawal
.The morula forms 124 hours after conception. At 148 hours, early blastocysts form. At 10–12 days, implantation occurs.The gestation of queens lasts between 64 and 67 days, with an average of 65 days.Data on the reproductive capacity of more than 2,300 free-
cases by dog attacks and road accidents.The first litter is usually smaller than subsequent litters. Kittens are weaned between six and seven weeks of age. Queens normally reach sexual maturity at 5–10 months, and males at 5–7 months. This varies depending on breed. Kittens reach puberty
depending on breed. Kittens reach puberty at the age of 9–10 months.Cats are ready to go to new homes at about 12 weeks of age, when they are ready to leave their mother. They can be surgically sterilized (spayed or castrated) as early as seven weeks
(spraying urine) in males and yowling (calling) in females. Traditionally, this surgery was performed at around six to nine months of age, but it is increasingly being performed before puberty, at about three to six months. In the United States, about 80%
age, but it is increasingly being performed before puberty, at about three to six months. In the United States, about 80% of household cats are neutered.The average lifespan of pet cats has risen in recent decades. In the early 1980s, it was about seven
puberty, at about three to six months. In the United States, about 80% of household cats are neutered.The average lifespan of pet cats has risen in recent decades. In the early 1980s, it was about seven years, rising to 9.4 years in 1995 and
. Some cats have been reported as surviving into their 30s, with the oldest known cat, Creme Puff, dying at a verified age of 38.Spaying or neutering increases life expectancy: one study found neutered male cats live twice as long as intact males, while spayed female cats live
favorably with those of pet cats.About two hundred fifty heritable genetic disorders have been identified in cats, many similar to human inborn errors of metabolism. The high level of similarity among the metabolism of mammals allows many of these feline diseases to be diagnosed using genetic tests that were
.About two hundred fifty heritable genetic disorders have been identified in cats, many similar to human inborn errors of metabolism. The high level of similarity among the metabolism of mammals allows many of these feline diseases to be diagnosed using genetic tests that were originally developed for use in humans
heritable genetic disorders have been identified in cats, many similar to human inborn errors of metabolism. The high level of similarity among the metabolism of mammals allows many of these feline diseases to be diagnosed using genetic tests that were originally developed for use in humans, as well as the
allows many of these feline diseases to be diagnosed using genetic tests that were originally developed for use in humans, as well as the use of cats as animal models in the study of the human diseases.Diseases affecting domestic cats include acute infections, parasitic infestations, injuries, and
across much of the world. It is adaptable and now present on all continents except Antarctica, and on 118 of the 131 main groups of islands—even on isolated islands such as the Kerguelen Islands.Due to its ability to thrive in almost any terrestrial habitat, it is
Feral cats may live alone, but most are found in large colonies, which occupy a specific territory and are usually associated with a source of food. Famous feral cat colonies are found in Rome around the Colosseum and Forum Romanum, with cats at some of these sites being fed
the United States, Australia, and the European Union in 2007. Cat pelts have been used for superstitious purposes as part of the practise of witchcraft, and are still made into blankets in Switzerland as folk remedies believed to help rheumatism. In the Western intellectual tradition, the idea
witchcraft, and are still made into blankets in Switzerland as folk remedies believed to help rheumatism. In the Western intellectual tradition, the idea of cats as everyday objects have served to illustrate problems of quantum mechanics in the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment.A few attempts to build a
an archive of 225,000 images that he drew from for publications during his lifetime.A cat show is a judged event in which the owners of cats compete to win titles in various cat-registering organizations by entering their cats to be judged after a breed standard. Both pedigreed and
awarded a prize. Moggies are judged based on their temperament and healthy appearance. Some events also include activity judging, such as trained navigation of obstacle course. Often, at the end of the year, all of the points accrued at various shows are added up and more national
likely to become infected, however, those who do not keep cats as pets might also acquire infections from cat feces and parasites exiting the cat's body. Some of the infections of most concern include salmonella, cat-scratch disease and toxoplasmosis.In ancient Egypt, cats were worshipped
to become infected, however, those who do not keep cats as pets might also acquire infections from cat feces and parasites exiting the cat's body. Some of the infections of most concern include salmonella, cat-scratch disease and toxoplasmosis.In ancient Egypt, cats were worshipped
the deities flee to Egypt and take animal forms, the goddess Diana turns into a cat. Cats eventually displaced weasels as the pest control of choice because they were more pleasant to have around the house and were more enthusiastic hunters of mice. During the Middle Ages, many of
. Cats eventually displaced weasels as the pest control of choice because they were more pleasant to have around the house and were more enthusiastic hunters of mice. During the Middle Ages, many of Artemis's associations with cats were grafted onto the Virgin Mary. Cats are often shown in
made by humans. In Japan, the maneki neko cat is a symbol of good fortune. In Norse mythology, Freyja, the goddess of love, beauty, and fertility, is depicted as riding a chariot drawn by cats. In Jewish legend, the first cat was living
a black cat "crossing one's path" leads to bad luck, or that cats are witches' familiars used to augment a witch's powers and skills. The killing of cats in Medieval Ypres, Belgium, is commemorated in the innocuous present-day Kattenstoet (cat parade
path" leads to bad luck, or that cats are witches' familiars used to augment a witch's powers and skills. The killing of cats in Medieval Ypres, Belgium, is commemorated in the innocuous present-day Kattenstoet (cat parade). In mid-16th century France,
commemorated in the innocuous present-day Kattenstoet (cat parade). In mid-16th century France, cats would be burnt alive as a form of entertainment. According to Norman Davies, the assembled people "shrieked with laughter as the animals, howling with pain, were singed, roasted
The French kings often witnessed these spectacles and even lit the bonfire with their own hands. In 1648 Louis XIV, crowned with a wreath of roses and carrying a bunch of roses in his hand, kindled the fire, danced at it and partook of the banquet afterwards in the
spectacles and even lit the bonfire with their own hands. In 1648 Louis XIV, crowned with a wreath of roses and carrying a bunch of roses in his hand, kindled the fire, danced at it and partook of the banquet afterwards in the town hall. But this was
, Brazil and some Spanish-speaking regions, they are said to have seven lives, while in Turkish and Arabic traditions, the number of lives is six. The myth is attributed to the natural suppleness and swiftness cats exhibit to escape life-threatening situations. Also lending credence
instinctive righting reflex to twist their bodies around. Nonetheless, cats can still be injured or killed by a high fall. The dictionary definition of cat at Wiktionary Data related to Cat at Wikispecies Media related to Cat at Wikimedia Commons Animal Care at Wikibooks Quotations related to Cat at Wikiquote"Cat

or be itchy.There are two major types of Hodgkin lymphoma: classical Hodgkin lymphoma and nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma. About half of cases of Hodgkin lymphoma are due to Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and these are generally the classic form. Other risk factors include
-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative diseases.Hodgkin lymphoma may be treated with chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and stem cell transplant. The choice of treatment often depends on how advanced the cancer has become and whether or not it has favorable features. In early disease, a cure is
advanced the cancer has become and whether or not it has favorable features. In early disease, a cure is often possible. The percentage of people who survive five years in the United States is 86%. For those under the age of 20, rates of survival are 97
. The percentage of people who survive five years in the United States is 86%. For those under the age of 20, rates of survival are 97%. Radiation and some chemotherapy drugs, however, increase the risk of other cancers, heart disease, or lung disease
In 2015, about 574,000 people globally had Hodgkin lymphoma, and 23,900 (4.2%) died. In the United States, 0.2% of people are affected at some point in their life. The most common age of diagnosis is between 20 and 40 years old. It was
%) died. In the United States, 0.2% of people are affected at some point in their life. The most common age of diagnosis is between 20 and 40 years old. It was named after the English physician Thomas Hodgkin, who first described the condition in 1832.People
lymph nodes of the chest are often affected, and these may be noticed on a chest radiograph.Systemic symptoms: about one-third of people with Hodgkin disease may also present with systemic symptoms, including:Itchy skinNight sweats.Unexplained weight loss of at least 10% of
lassitude).Systemic symptoms such as fever, night sweats, and weight loss are known as B symptoms; thus, presence of these indicate that the person's stage is, for example, 2B instead of 2A.Splenomegaly: enlargement of the spleen is often present in people with Hodgkin lymphoma. The enlargement
symptoms such as fever, night sweats, and weight loss are known as B symptoms; thus, presence of these indicate that the person's stage is, for example, 2B instead of 2A.Splenomegaly: enlargement of the spleen is often present in people with Hodgkin lymphoma. The enlargement
in people with Hodgkin lymphoma. The enlargement, however, is seldom massive, and the size of the spleen may fluctuate during the course of treatment.Hepatomegaly: enlargement of the liver, due to liver involvement, is infrequent in people with Hodgkin Lymphoma.Hepatosplenomegaly: the enlargement
consumption: classically, involved nodes are painful after alcohol consumption, though this phenomenon is very uncommon, occurring in only two to three percent of people with Hodgkin lymphoma, thus having a low sensitivity. On the other hand, its positive predictive value is high enough for it to
occur in individuals with Hodgkin lymphoma and is most commonly caused by minimal change disease.Hodgkin lymphoma must be distinguished from non-cancerous causes of lymph node swelling (such as various infections) and from other types of cancer. Definitive diagnosis is by lymph node biopsy (usually excisional
disease.Hodgkin lymphoma must be distinguished from non-cancerous causes of lymph node swelling (such as various infections) and from other types of cancer. Definitive diagnosis is by lymph node biopsy (usually excisional biopsy with microscopic examination). Blood tests are also performed to assess function
predominant Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is another subtype of Hodgkin lymphoma distinct from Classical Hodgkin lymphoma and is characterized by the presence of popcorn cells which express CD20. Due to these differences, among others, NLPHL is often treated differently from Classical Hodgkin lymphoma, including using
and non-Hodgkin lymphomas.After Hodgkin lymphoma is diagnosed, a person will be staged: that is, they will undergo a series of tests and procedures that will determine what areas of the body are affected. These procedures may include documentation of their histology, a physical examination
on the same side of the diaphragm (II) or of one lymph node region and a contiguous extralymphatic site (IIe);Stage III is involvement of lymph node regions on both sides of the diaphragm, which may include the spleen (IIIs) or limited contiguous extralymphatic organ or site (
to the stage; the presence of systemic symptoms is signified by adding "B" to the stage. For localised extranodal extension from mass of nodes that does not advance the stage, subscript "E" is added.  Splenic involvement is signified by adding "S" to
malignant cells known as Reed-Sternberg cells (RSC) (typical and variants) admixed within a reactive cell infiltrate composed of variable proportions of lymphocytes, histiocytes, eosinophils, and plasma cells. The Reed–Sternberg cells are identified as large often bi-nucleated cells with prominent
identified as large often bi-nucleated cells with prominent nucleoli and an unusual CD45-, CD30+, CD15+/- immunophenotype. In approximately 50% of cases, the Reed–Sternberg cells are infected by the Epstein–Barr virus.Characteristics of classic Reed–Sternberg cells include large size
and a thick nuclear membrane (chromatin is distributed close to the nuclear membrane). Almost all of these cells have an increased copy number of chromosome 9p/9p24.1.Variants:Hodgkin cell (atypical mononuclear RSC) is a variant of RS cell, which has the same characteristics, but is mononucleated
is not as important as it is in non-Hodgkin lymphoma: the treatment and prognosis in classic Hodgkin lymphoma usually depends on the stage of disease rather than the histotype.The current approach for treatment aims to reduce the acute and long-term toxicities associated with Hodgkin lymphoma (
and increase overall survival.People with early stage disease (IA or IIA) are effectively treated with radiation therapy or chemotherapy. The choice of treatment depends on the age, sex, bulk and the histological subtype of the disease. Adding localised radiation therapy after the chemotherapy regimen may
-Hodgkin treatment, rituximab (which is a monoclonal antibody against CD20) is not routinely used to treat Hodgkin lymphoma due to the lack of CD20 surface antigens in most cases. The use of rituximab in Hodgkin lymphoma, including the lymphocyte predominant subtype has been recently reviewed. The
few different ways radiation oncologists target the cancer cells. Involved site radiation is when the radiation oncologists give radiation only to those parts of the person's body known to have the cancer. Very often, this is combined with chemotherapy. Radiation therapy directed above the diaphragm to the neck,
different ways radiation oncologists target the cancer cells. Involved site radiation is when the radiation oncologists give radiation only to those parts of the person's body known to have the cancer. Very often, this is combined with chemotherapy. Radiation therapy directed above the diaphragm to the neck,
have spread.The high cure rates and long survival of many people with Hodgkin lymphoma has led to a high concern with late adverse effects of treatment, including cardiovascular disease and second malignancies such as acute leukemias, lymphomas, and solid tumors within the radiation therapy field. Most people
now treated with abbreviated chemotherapy and involved site radiation therapy rather than with radiation therapy alone. Clinical research strategies are exploring reduction of the duration of chemotherapy and dose and volume of radiation therapy in an attempt to reduce late morbidity and mortality of treatment while maintaining high cure rates. Hospitals
involved site radiation therapy rather than with radiation therapy alone. Clinical research strategies are exploring reduction of the duration of chemotherapy and dose and volume of radiation therapy in an attempt to reduce late morbidity and mortality of treatment while maintaining high cure rates. Hospitals are also treating those who respond
research strategies are exploring reduction of the duration of chemotherapy and dose and volume of radiation therapy in an attempt to reduce late morbidity and mortality of treatment while maintaining high cure rates. Hospitals are also treating those who respond quickly to chemotherapy with no radiation.In childhood cases of Hodgkin
to the standard treatment for adult patients with haematological malignancies like Hodgkin lymphoma may result in little to no difference in the mortality, the quality of life and the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression. Furthermore, aerobic physical exercises probably reduce fatigue.
adverse events. Treatment of Hodgkin's disease has been improving over the past few decades. Recent trials that have made use of new types of chemotherapy have indicated higher survival rates than have previously been seen. In one recent European trial, the 5-year survival rate for those
in people with locally extensive or advanced stage Hodgkin lymphoma. Freedom from progression (FFP) at 5 years was directly related to the number of factors present in a person. The 5-year FFP for people with zero factors is 84%. Each additional factor lowers the 5
-depleted histologies, male sex, large number of involved nodal sites, advanced stage, age of 40 years or more, the presence of B symptoms, high erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and bulky disease (widening of the mediastinum by more than one third, or the presence of
the mediastinum by more than one third, or the presence of a nodal mass measuring more than 10 cm in any dimension.)More recently, use of positron emission tomography (PET) early after commencing chemotherapy has demonstrated to have powerful prognostic ability. This enables assessment of an individual's response
use of positron emission tomography (PET) early after commencing chemotherapy has demonstrated to have powerful prognostic ability. This enables assessment of an individual's response to chemotherapy as the PET activity switches off rapidly in people who are responding. In this study, after two cycles of ABVD chemotherapy
an individual's response to chemotherapy as the PET activity switches off rapidly in people who are responding. In this study, after two cycles of ABVD chemotherapy, 83% of people were free of disease at 3 years if they had a negative PET versus only 28% in those
as the PET activity switches off rapidly in people who are responding. In this study, after two cycles of ABVD chemotherapy, 83% of people were free of disease at 3 years if they had a negative PET versus only 28% in those with positive PET scans. This
,Unlike some other lymphomas, whose number of new cases per year increases with age, Hodgkin lymphoma has a bimodal curve for the number of cases; that is, it occurs most frequently in two separate age groups, the first being young adulthood (age 15–35) and the
, it is more common in males, except for the nodular sclerosis variant, which is slightly more common in females. The annual number of cases of Hodgkin lymphoma is 2.7 per 100,000 per persons per year, and the disease accounts for slightly less than 1% of all cancers
smoking, obesity, physical inactivity, and reproductive behaviors, as well as availability of diagnostic practices and awareness of the disease.The number of cases of Hodgkin lymphoma is increased in people with HIV infection. In contrast to many other lymphomas associated with HIV infection it occurs most commonly
the absorbent glands and spleen", was presented to the Medical and Chirurgical Society of London in January 1832 and was subsequently published in the society's journal, Medical-Chirurgical Society Transactions. Hodgkin's paper went largely unnoticed, however, even despite Bright highlighting it in an 1838 publication
absorbent glands and spleen", was presented to the Medical and Chirurgical Society of London in January 1832 and was subsequently published in the society's journal, Medical-Chirurgical Society Transactions. Hodgkin's paper went largely unnoticed, however, even despite Bright highlighting it in an 1838 publication
1838 publication. Indeed, Hodgkin himself did not view his contribution as particularly significant.In 1856, Samuel Wilks independently reported on a series of people with the same disease that Hodgkin had previously described. Wilks, a successor to Hodgkin at Guy's Hospital, was unaware of Hodgkin
work on the subject. Bright made Wilks aware of Hodgkin's contribution and in 1865, Wilks published a second paper, entitled "Cases of enlargement of the lymphatic glands and spleen", in which he called the disease "Hodgkin's disease" in honor of his predecessor.
cells of Hodgkin lymphoma, now called Reed–Sternberg cells.Tissue specimens from Hodgkin seven people remained at Guy's Hospital for a number of years. Nearly 100 years after Hodgkin's initial publication, histopathologic reexamination confirmed Hodgkin lymphoma in only three of seven of these people. The


include bone pain, chest pain or itchiness. Some forms are slow-growing, while others are fast-growing.Lymphomas are types of cancer that develop from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Risk factors include poor immune function, autoimmune diseases, Helicobacter pylori infection
Organization  classifies lymphomas into five major groups, including one for Hodgkin lymphoma. Within the four groups for NHL are over 60 specific types of lymphoma. Diagnosis is by examination of a bone marrow or lymph node biopsy. Medical imaging is done to help with cancer staging.Treatment
immunotherapy, targeted therapy, stem-cell transplantation, surgery, or watchful waiting. If the blood becomes overly thick due to high numbers of antibodies, plasmapheresis may be used. Radiation and some chemotherapy, however, increase the risk of other cancers, heart disease, or nerve
decades.In 2015, about 4.3 million people had non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and 231,400 died. In the United States, 2.1% of people are affected at some point in their life. The most common age of diagnosis is between 65 and 75 years old. The five
and 231,400 died. In the United States, 2.1% of people are affected at some point in their life. The most common age of diagnosis is between 65 and 75 years old. The five-year survival rate in the United States is 71%.The signs and symptoms of non
personality changes.While an association between non-Hodgkin lymphoma and endometriosis has been described, these associations are tentative.The many different forms of lymphoma probably have different causes. These possible causes and associations with at least some forms of NHL include:Infectious agents:Epstein–Barr
.Implants, made from hard metals or silicone, associated with anaplastic large cell lymphoma.Familial lymphoid cancer is rare. The familial risk of lymphoma is elevated for multiple lymphoma subtypes, suggesting a shared genetic cause. However, a family history of a specific subtype is most strongly
. Additionally, other retroviruses, such as HTLV, may be spread by the same mechanisms that spread HIV, leading to an increased rate of co-infection. The natural history of HIV infection has been greatly changed over time. As a consequence, rates of non-Hodgkin
stromal cells (MSCs) may reduce the all-cause mortality if they are used for a therapeutic reason. Moreover, the therapeutic use of MSCs may increase the complete response of acute and chronic GvHD, but the evidence is very uncertain. The evidence suggests that MSCs for prophylactic
prophylactic platelet transfusions there is little to no difference in the mortality secondary to bleeding and they may result in a slight reduction in the number of days on which a significant bleeding event occurred. The evidence suggests that therapeutic platelet transfusions result in a large increase in the number of people
number of days on which a significant bleeding event occurred. The evidence suggests that therapeutic platelet transfusions result in a large increase in the number of people with at least one significant bleeding event and they likely result in a large reduction in the number of platelet transfusions.It is not
a large increase in the number of people with at least one significant bleeding event and they likely result in a large reduction in the number of platelet transfusions.It is not clear if including aerobic physical exercise, in addition to the standard treatment for adult patients with haematological malignancies,
effective at reducing anxiety and serious adverse effects. Aerobic physical exercises may result in little to no difference in the mortality, in the quality of life and in the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression and probably reduce fatigue.Prognosis depends on the
These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression and probably reduce fatigue.Prognosis depends on the subtype, the staging, a person's age, and other factors. Across all subtypes, 5-year survival for NHL is 71%, ranging from 81% for Stage
13,900 people are diagnosed with NHL yearly. It is the sixth most common cancer in the UK, and is the eleventh most common cause of cancer death accounting for around 4,900 deaths per year.Age adjusted data from 2012-2016 shows about 19.6 cases of NHL per 100,000 adults
adults per year, 5.6 deaths per 100,000 adults per year, and around 694,704 people living with non-Hodgkin lymphoma. About 2.2 percent of men and women will be diagnosed with NHL at some point during their lifetime.The American Cancer Society lists non-Hodgkin lymphoma as one
very different diseases requiring further classification. The Rappaport classification, proposed by Henry Rappaport in 1956 and 1966, became the first widely accepted classification of lymphomas other than Hodgkin. Following its publication in 1982, the Working Formulation became the standard classification for this group of diseases. It introduced
first widely accepted classification of lymphomas other than Hodgkin. Following its publication in 1982, the Working Formulation became the standard classification for this group of diseases. It introduced the term non-Hodgkin lymphoma or NHL and defined three grades of lymphoma.NHL consists of many different conditions that
Working Formulation became the standard classification for this group of diseases. It introduced the term non-Hodgkin lymphoma or NHL and defined three grades of lymphoma.NHL consists of many different conditions that have little in common with each other. They are grouped by their aggressiveness. Less aggressive
Hodgkin lymphomas can be rapidly fatal without treatment. Without further narrowing, the label is of limited usefulness for people or doctors. The subtypes of lymphoma are listed there.Nevertheless, the Working Formulation and the NHL category continue to be used by many. To this day, lymphoma
tumors along with genes and proteins causative in different phenotypes. Radiotherapy for unrelated conditions may be a rare cause.Familial cases where the deletion of chromosome 13q14 inactivates the retinoblastoma gene is associated with a high risk of osteosarcoma development.Bone dysplasias, including Paget's disease of bone,
unrelated conditions may be a rare cause.Familial cases where the deletion of chromosome 13q14 inactivates the retinoblastoma gene is associated with a high risk of osteosarcoma development.Bone dysplasias, including Paget's disease of bone, fibrous dysplasia, enchondromatosis, and hereditary multiple exostoses, increase the risk
the deletion of chromosome 13q14 inactivates the retinoblastoma gene is associated with a high risk of osteosarcoma development.Bone dysplasias, including Paget's disease of bone, fibrous dysplasia, enchondromatosis, and hereditary multiple exostoses, increase the risk of osteosarcoma.Li–Fraumeni syndrome (germline TP53 mutation
osteosarcoma development.Bone dysplasias, including Paget's disease of bone, fibrous dysplasia, enchondromatosis, and hereditary multiple exostoses, increase the risk of osteosarcoma.Li–Fraumeni syndrome (germline TP53 mutation) is a predisposing factor for osteosarcoma development.Rothmund–Thomson syndrome (i.e. autosomal
hypogonadism, and cataracts) is associated with increased risk of this disease.Large doses of Sr-90, nicknamed bone seeker, increases the risk of bone cancer and leukemia in animals and is presumed to do so in people.There is no clear association between water fluoridation and cancer or
between water fluoridation and cancer or deaths due to cancer, both for cancer in general and also specifically for bone cancer and osteosarcoma. Series of research concluded that concentration of fluoride in water doesn't associate with osteosarcoma. The beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a
or deaths due to cancer, both for cancer in general and also specifically for bone cancer and osteosarcoma. Series of research concluded that concentration of fluoride in water doesn't associate with osteosarcoma. The beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a study of US National Toxicology
for bone cancer and osteosarcoma. Series of research concluded that concentration of fluoride in water doesn't associate with osteosarcoma. The beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a study of US National Toxicology program in 1990, which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma
. The beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a study of US National Toxicology program in 1990, which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice.
beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a study of US National Toxicology program in 1990, which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice. Fluoridation of
Toxicology program in 1990, which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice. Fluoridation of water has been practiced around the world to improve citizens' dental health. It
which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice. Fluoridation of water has been practiced around the world to improve citizens' dental health. It is also deemed as major
of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice. Fluoridation of water has been practiced around the world to improve citizens' dental health. It is also deemed as major health success. Fluoride concentration levels
new bone formation.  Yet, further research shows no osteosarcoma risks from fluoridated water in humans. Most of the research involved counting number of osteosarcoma patients cases in particular areas which has difference concentrations of fluoride in drinking water. The statistic analysis of the data shows no significant difference
osteosarcoma risks from fluoridated water in humans. Most of the research involved counting number of osteosarcoma patients cases in particular areas which has difference concentrations of fluoride in drinking water. The statistic analysis of the data shows no significant difference in occurrences of osteosarcoma cases in different fluoridated regions. Another
cases in particular areas which has difference concentrations of fluoride in drinking water. The statistic analysis of the data shows no significant difference in occurrences of osteosarcoma cases in different fluoridated regions. Another important research involved collecting bone samples from osteosarcoma patients to measure fluoride concentration and compare them to bone
fluoride concentration and compare them to bone samples of newly diagnosed malignant bone tumors. The result is that the median fluoride concentrations in bone samples of osteosarcoma patients and tumor controls are not significantly different. Not only fluoride concentration in bones, Fluoride exposures of osteosarcoma patients are also proven to
median fluoride concentrations in bone samples of osteosarcoma patients and tumor controls are not significantly different. Not only fluoride concentration in bones, Fluoride exposures of osteosarcoma patients are also proven to be not significantly different from healthy people.Osteosarcomas tend to occur at the sites of bone growth, presumably
bones, Fluoride exposures of osteosarcoma patients are also proven to be not significantly different from healthy people.Osteosarcomas tend to occur at the sites of bone growth, presumably because proliferation makes osteoblastic cells in this region prone to acquire mutations that could lead to transformation of cells (the RB
occur at the sites of bone growth, presumably because proliferation makes osteoblastic cells in this region prone to acquire mutations that could lead to transformation of cells (the RB gene and p53 gene are commonly involved). Due to this tendency, high incidence of osteosarcoma is seen in some
that could lead to transformation of cells (the RB gene and p53 gene are commonly involved). Due to this tendency, high incidence of osteosarcoma is seen in some large dog breeds (St. Bernards and Great Danes). The tumor may be localized at the end of the
The tumor may be localized at the end of the long bone (commonly in the metaphysis). Most often it affects the proximal end of tibia or humerus, or distal end of femur. Osteosarcoma tends to affect regions around the knee in 60% of cases, 15%
of the long bone (commonly in the metaphysis). Most often it affects the proximal end of tibia or humerus, or distal end of femur. Osteosarcoma tends to affect regions around the knee in 60% of cases, 15% around the hip, 10% at the
affects the proximal end of tibia or humerus, or distal end of femur. Osteosarcoma tends to affect regions around the knee in 60% of cases, 15% around the hip, 10% at the shoulder, and 8% in the jaw. The tumor is solid,
is known as a Codman triangle, which is characteristic but not diagnostic of osteosarcoma. Surrounding tissues are infiltrated.Microscopically: The characteristic feature of osteosarcoma is presence of osteoid (bone formation) within the tumor. Tumor cells are very pleomorphic (anaplastic), some are giant,
Codman triangle, which is characteristic but not diagnostic of osteosarcoma. Surrounding tissues are infiltrated.Microscopically: The characteristic feature of osteosarcoma is presence of osteoid (bone formation) within the tumor. Tumor cells are very pleomorphic (anaplastic), some are giant, numerous atypical mitoses.
tumor (most bone tumors are benign). The route to osteosarcoma diagnosis usually begins with an X-ray, continues with a combination of scans (CT scan, PET scan, bone scan, MRI) and ends with a surgical biopsy. A characteristic often seen in an
suggestive, but bone biopsy is the only definitive method to determine whether a tumor is malignant or benign.Most times, the early signs of osteosarcoma are caught on X-rays taken during routine dental check-ups. Osteosarcoma frequently develops in the mandible (lower jaw);
grade central OSPeriosteal OSParaosteal OSSecondary OSHigh-grade surface OSExtraskeletal OSA complete radical, surgical, en bloc resection of the cancer, is the treatment of choice in osteosarcoma. Although about 90% of patients are able to have limb-salvage surgery, complications, particularly infection, prosthetic loosening
OSExtraskeletal OSA complete radical, surgical, en bloc resection of the cancer, is the treatment of choice in osteosarcoma. Although about 90% of patients are able to have limb-salvage surgery, complications, particularly infection, prosthetic loosening and non-union, or local tumor recurrence
Mifamurtide is used after a patient has had surgery to remove the tumor and together with chemotherapy to kill remaining cancer cells to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. Also, the option to have rotationplasty after the tumor is taken out exists.Patients with osteosarcoma are best managed by a
experienced in managing sarcomas. Current standard treatment is to use neoadjuvant chemotherapy (chemotherapy given before surgery) followed by surgical resection. The percentage of tumor cell necrosis (cell death) seen in the tumor after surgery gives an idea of the prognosis and also lets the oncologist know if
an idea of the prognosis and also lets the oncologist know if the chemotherapy regimen should be altered after surgery.Standard therapy is a combination of limb-salvage orthopedic surgery when possible (or amputation in some cases) and a combination of high-dose methotrexate with leucovorin rescue,
muramyl tripeptide. Rotationplasty may be used. Ifosfamide can be used as an adjuvant treatment if the necrosis rate is low.Despite the success of chemotherapy for osteosarcoma, it has one of the lowest survival rates for pediatric cancer. The best reported 10-year survival rate is 92
or pegfilgrastim help with white blood cell counts and neutrophil counts. Blood transfusions and epoetin alfa help with anemia. Computational analysis on a panel of osteosarcoma cell lines identified new shared and specific therapeutic targets (proteomic and genetic) in osteosarcoma, while phenotypes showed an increased role of tumor
panel of osteosarcoma cell lines identified new shared and specific therapeutic targets (proteomic and genetic) in osteosarcoma, while phenotypes showed an increased role of tumor microenvironments.Prognosis is separated into three groups.Stage I osteosarcoma is rare and includes parosteal osteosarcoma or low-grade central osteosarcoma.
the site of the tumor (proximal tibia, femur, pelvis, etc.), size of the tumor mass, and the degree of necrosis from neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Other pathological factors such as the degree of p-glycoprotein, whether the tumor is cxcr4-positive, or
etc.), size of the tumor mass, and the degree of necrosis from neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Other pathological factors such as the degree of p-glycoprotein, whether the tumor is cxcr4-positive, or Her2-positive are also important, as these are associated with distant
The prognosis for patients with metastatic osteosarcoma improves with longer times to metastases (more than 12 months to 4 months), a smaller number of metastases, and their resectability.  It is better to have fewer metastases than longer time to metastases.  Those with a longer length
metastases, and their resectability.  It is better to have fewer metastases than longer time to metastases.  Those with a longer length of time (more than 24 months) and few nodules (two or fewer) have the best prognosis, with a two-year survival
%, and 10-year of 20%.  If metastases are both local and regional, the prognosis is worse.Initial presentation of stage III osteosarcoma with lung metastases depends on the resectability of the primary tumor and lung nodules, degree of necrosis of the primary tumor,
prognosis is worse.Initial presentation of stage III osteosarcoma with lung metastases depends on the resectability of the primary tumor and lung nodules, degree of necrosis of the primary tumor, and maybe the number of metastases.  Overall survival prognosis is about 30%.Deaths due to malignant neoplasms of the
lung metastases depends on the resectability of the primary tumor and lung nodules, degree of necrosis of the primary tumor, and maybe the number of metastases.  Overall survival prognosis is about 30%.Deaths due to malignant neoplasms of the bones and joints account for an unknown number of childhood cancer
the number of metastases.  Overall survival prognosis is about 30%.Deaths due to malignant neoplasms of the bones and joints account for an unknown number of childhood cancer deaths. Mortality rates due to osteosarcoma have been declining at about 1.3% per year. Long-term survival probabilities for osteosarcoma
term survival probabilities for osteosarcoma have improved dramatically during the late 20th century and approximated 68% in 2009.Osteosarcoma is the eighth-most common form of childhood cancer, comprising 2.4% of all malignancies in pediatric patients, and about 20% of all primary bone cancers.Incidence rates for
all malignancies in pediatric patients, and about 20% of all primary bone cancers.Incidence rates for osteosarcoma in U.S. patients under 20 years of age are estimated at 5.0 per million per year in the general population, with a slight variation between individuals of black, Hispanic, and
each year.  A second peak in incidence occurs in the elderly, usually associated with an underlying bone pathology such as Paget's disease of bone.Osteosarcoma is the most common bone tumor in dogs and typically afflicts middle-aged large and giant breed dogs such as Irish Wolfhounds
, the mandible, the spine, and the pelvis.  Rarely, osteosarcoma may arise from soft tissues (extraskeletal osteosarcoma). Metastasis of tumors involving the limb bones is very common, usually to the lungs. The tumor causes a great deal of pain, and can even
extraskeletal osteosarcoma). Metastasis of tumors involving the limb bones is very common, usually to the lungs. The tumor causes a great deal of pain, and can even lead to fracture of the affected bone. As with human osteosarcoma, bone biopsy is the definitive method to reach
lesions, such as osteomyelitis. Differential diagnosis of the osteosarcoma of the skull in particular includes, among others, chondrosarcoma and the multilobular tumour of bone.Amputation is the initial treatment, although this alone will not prevent metastasis. Chemotherapy combined with amputation improves the survival time, but
procedures) do not improve the prognosis.Some current studies indicate osteoclast inhibitors such as alendronate and pamidronate may have beneficial effects on the quality of life by reducing osteolysis, thus reducing the degree of pain, as well as the risk of pathological fractures.Osteosarcoma is also the most
studies indicate osteoclast inhibitors such as alendronate and pamidronate may have beneficial effects on the quality of life by reducing osteolysis, thus reducing the degree of pain, as well as the risk of pathological fractures.Osteosarcoma is also the most common bone tumor in cats, although not as frequently

so do not become healthy blood cells. Early on, no symptoms typically are seen. Later, symptoms may include feeling tired, shortness of breath, bleeding disorders, anemia, or frequent infections. Some types may develop into acute myeloid leukemia.Risk factors include previous chemotherapy or
a donor.About seven per 100,000 people are affected with about four per 100,000 people newly acquiring the condition each year. The typical age of onset is 70 years. The outlook depends on the type of cells affected, the number of blasts in the bone marrow or blood,
four per 100,000 people newly acquiring the condition each year. The typical age of onset is 70 years. The outlook depends on the type of cells affected, the number of blasts in the bone marrow or blood, and the changes present in the chromosomes of the affected cells.
the condition each year. The typical age of onset is 70 years. The outlook depends on the type of cells affected, the number of blasts in the bone marrow or blood, and the changes present in the chromosomes of the affected cells. The typical survival time following diagnosis
and symptoms are nonspecific and generally related to the blood cytopenias:Anemia (low RBC count or reduced hemoglobin) – chronic tiredness, shortness of breath, chilled sensation, sometimes chest painNeutropenia (low neutrophil count) – increased susceptibility to infectionThrombocytopenia (low platelet count) – increased susceptibility
abnormal nuclear shape and sizeChromosome abnormality, including chromosomal translocations and abnormal chromosome numberAlthough some risk exists for developing acute myelogenous leukemia, about 50% of deaths occur as a result of bleeding or infection. However, leukemia that occurs as a result of myelodysplasia is notoriously resistant to treatment.
, including chromosomal translocations and abnormal chromosome numberAlthough some risk exists for developing acute myelogenous leukemia, about 50% of deaths occur as a result of bleeding or infection. However, leukemia that occurs as a result of myelodysplasia is notoriously resistant to treatment.  Anemia dominates the early course
acute myelogenous leukemia, about 50% of deaths occur as a result of bleeding or infection. However, leukemia that occurs as a result of myelodysplasia is notoriously resistant to treatment.  Anemia dominates the early course. Most symptomatic patients complain of the gradual onset of fatigue and weakness
as a result of myelodysplasia is notoriously resistant to treatment.  Anemia dominates the early course. Most symptomatic patients complain of the gradual onset of fatigue and weakness, dyspnea, and pallor, but at least half the patients are asymptomatic and their MDS is discovered only incidentally on routine
in the person's medical history. Fever and weight loss should point to a myeloproliferative rather than myelodysplastic process.Some people have a history of exposure to chemotherapy (especially alkylating agents such as melphalan, cyclophosphamide, busulfan, and chlorambucil) or radiation (therapeutic or accidental),
as melphalan, cyclophosphamide, busulfan, and chlorambucil) or radiation (therapeutic or accidental), or both (e.g., at the time of stem cell transplantation for another disease). Workers in some industries with heavy exposure to hydrocarbons such as the petroleum industry have a slightly higher
of MDS can be difficult, but the presence of genetic abnormalities may provide some supportive information. Secondary MDS can occur as a late toxicity of cancer therapy (therapy associated MDS, t-MDS). MDS after exposure to radiation or alkylating agents such as busulfan, nitrosourea,
after exposure to radiation or alkylating agents such as busulfan, nitrosourea, or procarbazine, typically occurs 3–7 years after exposure and frequently demonstrates loss of chromosome 5 or 7. MDS after exposure to DNA topoisomerase II inhibitors occurs after a shorter latency of only 1–3 years and can have a
to arise from mutations in the multipotent bone-marrow stem cell, but the specific defects responsible for these diseases remain poorly understood. Differentiation of blood precursor cells is impaired, and  a significant increase in levels of apoptotic cell death occurs in bone-marrow cells. Clonal expansion
a significant increase in levels of apoptotic cell death occurs in bone-marrow cells. Clonal expansion of the abnormal cells results in the production of cells that have lost the ability to differentiate. If the overall percentage of bone-marrow myeloblasts rises over a particular cutoff (20%
cells. Clonal expansion of the abnormal cells results in the production of cells that have lost the ability to differentiate. If the overall percentage of bone-marrow myeloblasts rises over a particular cutoff (20% for WHO and 30% for FAB), then transformation to acute myelogenous
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) is said to have occurred. The progression of MDS to AML is a good example of the multistep theory of carcinogenesis in which a series of mutations occurs in an initially normal cell and transforms it into a cancer cell.While recognition of leukemic transformation
is said to have occurred. The progression of MDS to AML is a good example of the multistep theory of carcinogenesis in which a series of mutations occurs in an initially normal cell and transforms it into a cancer cell.While recognition of leukemic transformation was historically important (see History
but rather from the cytopenias seen in all MDS patients. While anemia is the most common cytopenia in MDS patients, given the ready availability of blood transfusion, MDS patients rarely suffer injury from severe anemia.  The two most serious complications in MDS patients resulting from their cytopenias are
rarely suffer injury from severe anemia.  The two most serious complications in MDS patients resulting from their cytopenias are bleeding (due to lack of platelets) or infection (due to lack of white blood cells).  Long-term transfusion of packed red blood cells leads to
lenalidomide) commercially available medications approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration  to treat MDS. Proper DNA methylation is critical in the regulation of proliferation genes, and the loss of DNA methylation control can lead to uncontrolled cell growth and cytopenias.  The recently approved DNA methyltransferase inhibitors
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration  to treat MDS. Proper DNA methylation is critical in the regulation of proliferation genes, and the loss of DNA methylation control can lead to uncontrolled cell growth and cytopenias.  The recently approved DNA methyltransferase inhibitors take advantage of this mechanism by creating
and retarding the progression of MDS to acute leukemia.Some authors have proposed that the loss of mitochondrial function over time leads to the accumulation of DNA mutations in hematopoietic stem cells, and this accounts for the increased incidence of MDS in older patients.  Researchers point to the accumulation
accumulation of mitochondrial iron deposits in the ringed sideroblast as evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction in MDS.Since at least 1974, the deletion in the long arm of chromosome 5 has been known to be associated with dysplastic abnormalities of hematopoietic stem cells.  By 2005, lenalidomide, a chemotherapy drug,
inducing better differentiation of healthy erythroid cells, as seen in patients without 5q deletion.Mutations in splicing factors have been found in 40–80% of cases with myelodysplastic syndrome, particularly in those with ringed sideroblasts.Mutations in the genes encoding for isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1 and
in those with ringed sideroblasts.Mutations in the genes encoding for isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1 and IDH2) occur in 10–20% of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome, and confer a worsened prognosis in low-risk MDS. Because the incidence of IDH1/2 mutations increases as the disease
IDH2) occur in 10–20% of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome, and confer a worsened prognosis in low-risk MDS. Because the incidence of IDH1/2 mutations increases as the disease malignancy increases, these findings together suggest that IDH1/2 mutations are important drivers of progression of MDS to a more
risk MDS. Because the incidence of IDH1/2 mutations increases as the disease malignancy increases, these findings together suggest that IDH1/2 mutations are important drivers of progression of MDS to a more malignant disease state.GATA2 deficiency is a group of disorders caused by a defect, familial, or sporadic
these findings together suggest that IDH1/2 mutations are important drivers of progression of MDS to a more malignant disease state.GATA2 deficiency is a group of disorders caused by a defect, familial, or sporadic inactivating mutations, in one of the two GATA2 genes. These autosomal dominant mutations cause
sporadic inactivating mutations, in one of the two GATA2 genes. These autosomal dominant mutations cause a reduction, in the cellular levels of the gene's product, GATA2. The GATA2 protein is a transcription factor critical for the embryonic development, maintenance, and functionality of blood-forming,
inactivating mutations, in one of the two GATA2 genes. These autosomal dominant mutations cause a reduction, in the cellular levels of the gene's product, GATA2. The GATA2 protein is a transcription factor critical for the embryonic development, maintenance, and functionality of blood-forming,
levels of the gene's product, GATA2. The GATA2 protein is a transcription factor critical for the embryonic development, maintenance, and functionality of blood-forming, lymph-forming, and other tissue-forming stem cells. In consequence of these mutations,  cellular levels of
similar to those in Down syndrome, develops during pregnancy or shortly after birth, and resolves within 3 months, or in about 10% of cases, progresses to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.The elimination of other causes of cytopenias, along with a dysplastic bone marrow, is required to
, and resolves within 3 months, or in about 10% of cases, progresses to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.The elimination of other causes of cytopenias, along with a dysplastic bone marrow, is required to diagnose a myelodysplastic syndrome, so differentiating MDS from anemia, thrombocytopenia, and
syndrome, so differentiating MDS from anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia is important.A typical diagnostic investigation includes:Full blood count and examination of blood film: The blood film morphology can provide clues about hemolytic anemia, clumping of the platelets leading to spurious thrombocytopenia, or leukemia.
can provide clues about hemolytic anemia, clumping of the platelets leading to spurious thrombocytopenia, or leukemia.Blood tests to eliminate other common causes of cytopenias such as lupus, hepatitis, B12, folate, or other vitamin deficiencies, kidney failure or heart failure, HIV, hemolytic anemia
patients.Bone marrow examination by a hematopathologist: This is required to establish the diagnosis, since all hematopathologists consider dysplastic marrow the key feature of myelodysplasia.Cytogenetics or chromosomal studies: This is ideally performed on the bone marrow aspirate. Conventional cytogenetics require a fresh specimen, since live
eosinophilic granules) within eosinophilsErythroid series:Binucleated erythroid precursors and karyorrhexisErythroid nuclear buddingErythroid nuclear strings or internuclear bridging (also seen in congenital dyserythropoietic anemias)Loss of e-cadherin in normoblasts is a sign of aberrancy.Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) (globular in vacuoles or diffuse cytoplasmic staining
precursors and karyorrhexisErythroid nuclear buddingErythroid nuclear strings or internuclear bridging (also seen in congenital dyserythropoietic anemias)Loss of e-cadherin in normoblasts is a sign of aberrancy.Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) (globular in vacuoles or diffuse cytoplasmic staining) within erythroid precursors in the bone marrow aspirate
(seen with interference contrast microscopy)Other stains can help in special cases (PAS and napthol ASD chloroacetate esterase positivity) in eosinophils is a marker of abnormality seen in chronic eosinophilic leukemia and is a sign of aberrancy.On the bone-marrow biopsy, high-grade dysplasia (RAEB
cases (PAS and napthol ASD chloroacetate esterase positivity) in eosinophils is a marker of abnormality seen in chronic eosinophilic leukemia and is a sign of aberrancy.On the bone-marrow biopsy, high-grade dysplasia (RAEB-I and RAEB-II) may show atypical localization
RA and RARS), where normoblasts are seen next to bony trabeculae instead of forming normal interstitially placed erythroid islands.Myelodysplasia is a diagnosis of exclusion and must be made after proper determination of iron stores, vitamin deficiencies, and nutrient deficiencies are ruled out. Also, congenital diseases
next to bony trabeculae instead of forming normal interstitially placed erythroid islands.Myelodysplasia is a diagnosis of exclusion and must be made after proper determination of iron stores, vitamin deficiencies, and nutrient deficiencies are ruled out. Also, congenital diseases such as congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (CDA I through
a pseudomyelodysplastic picture in one of the cell lines; however, all three cell lines are never morphologically dysplastic in these entities with the exception of chloramphenicol, arsenic toxicity, and other poisons.All of these conditions are characterized by abnormalities in the production of one or more of the
arsenic toxicity, and other poisons.All of these conditions are characterized by abnormalities in the production of one or more of the cellular components of blood (red cells, white cells other than lymphocytes, and platelets or their progenitor cells, megakaryocytes). French-American-British
and platelets or their progenitor cells, megakaryocytes). French-American-British (FAB) classification In 1974 and 1975, a group of pathologists from France, the US, and Britain produced the first widely used classification of these diseases. This French-American-British classification
). The worst outlook is with RAEB-T, where the mean life expectancy is less than 1 year. About one-quarter of patients develop overt leukemia. The others die of complications of low blood count or unrelated disease. The International Prognostic Scoring System is another tool
Scoring System is another tool for determining the prognosis of MDS, published in Blood in 1997.  This system takes into account the percentage of blasts in the marrow, cytogenetics, and number of cytopenias. World Health Organization In the late 1990s, a group of pathologists and clinicians
MDS, published in Blood in 1997.  This system takes into account the percentage of blasts in the marrow, cytogenetics, and number of cytopenias. World Health Organization In the late 1990s, a group of pathologists and clinicians working under the World Health Organization (WHO) modified
account the percentage of blasts in the marrow, cytogenetics, and number of cytopenias. World Health Organization In the late 1990s, a group of pathologists and clinicians working under the World Health Organization (WHO) modified this classification, introducing several new disease categories and eliminating others. Most
anemia should be made with caution.Patients with RA or RAEB occasionally present with leukocytosis or thrombocytosis instead of the usual cytopenia.The goals of therapy are to control symptoms, improve quality of life, improve overall survival, and decrease progression to AML.The IPSS scoring system can help triage
RA or RAEB occasionally present with leukocytosis or thrombocytosis instead of the usual cytopenia.The goals of therapy are to control symptoms, improve quality of life, improve overall survival, and decrease progression to AML.The IPSS scoring system can help triage patients for more aggressive treatment (i.e. bone marrow
help determine the best timing of this therapy.  Supportive care with blood products and hematopoietic growth factors (e.g. erythropoietin) is the mainstay of therapy. The regulatory environment for the use of erythropoietins is evolving, according to a recent US Medicare National coverage determination. However, no
 Supportive care with blood products and hematopoietic growth factors (e.g. erythropoietin) is the mainstay of therapy. The regulatory environment for the use of erythropoietins is evolving, according to a recent US Medicare National coverage determination. However, no comment on the use of hematopoietic growth factors for
requirement in patients with the chromosome 5q deletion subtype of MDSDecitabine/cedazuridine (Inqovi) is a fixed-dosed combination medication for the treatment of adults with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML).Chemotherapy with the hypomethylating agents 5-azacytidine and decitabine has been shown to
$9,200 per month. The chemotherapy may be supported by other drugs like all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), however the evidence of benefit is not clear.HLA-matched allogeneic stem cell transplantation, particularly in younger (i.e. less than 40 years of age) and
however the evidence of benefit is not clear.HLA-matched allogeneic stem cell transplantation, particularly in younger (i.e. less than 40 years of age) and more severely affected patients, offers the potential for curative therapy. Success of bone marrow transplantation has been found to correlate with
particularly in younger (i.e. less than 40 years of age) and more severely affected patients, offers the potential for curative therapy. Success of bone marrow transplantation has been found to correlate with severity of MDS as determined by the IPSS score, with patients having a more favorable IPSS
addition to the standard treatment for  adult patients with haematological malignancies may result in little to no difference in the mortality, in the quality of life and in the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression. Furthermore, aerobic physical exercises probably reduce fatigue
available in the US.Clinical trials in the MDS are ongoing with iron chelating agents to address the question of whether iron chelation alters the natural history of patients with MDS who are transfusion dependent. Reversal of some of the consequences of iron overload in MDS by iron chelation therapy have been shown
address the question of whether iron chelation alters the natural history of patients with MDS who are transfusion dependent. Reversal of some of the consequences of iron overload in MDS by iron chelation therapy have been shown.Both the MDS Foundation and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network MDS Guidelines Panel have
or liver failure occurred, some resulting in death. Due to this, patients should be closely monitored on deferasirox therapy prior to the start of therapy and regularly thereafter.The outlook in MDS is variable, with about 30% of patients progressing to refractory AML. The median survival
closely monitored on deferasirox therapy prior to the start of therapy and regularly thereafter.The outlook in MDS is variable, with about 30% of patients progressing to refractory AML. The median survival time varies from years to months, depending on type. Stem-cell transplantation offers possible
this disease. For example, in low-risk MDS, IDH1 and IDH2 mutations are associated with significantly worsened survival.The exact number of people with MDS is not known because it can go undiagnosed and no tracking of the syndrome is mandated. Some estimates are on the order
affected than females.Since the early 20th century, some people with acute myelogenous leukemia were begun to be recognized to have a preceding period of anemia and abnormal blood cell production.  These conditions were lumped together with other diseases under the term "refractory anemia".  The
that notochordal cells are preferentially left behind in the clivus and sacrococcygeal regions when the remainder of the notochord regresses during fetal life.In layman's terms, chordoma is a type of spinal cancer.Chordomas can arise from bone in the skull base and anywhere along the spine. The
spine. The two most common locations are cranially at the clivus and in the sacrum at the bottom of the spine.A small number of families have been reported in which multiple relatives have been affected by chordoma. In four of these families, duplication of the brachyury gene was
nearly all sacral chordomasIn a study of 49 chordomas Akt, TSC2, and EIF4EBP1 were phosphorylated in 92%, 96% and 98% of cases, respectively.In a tissue microarray containing 21 chordomas Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta (PDGFR-b), epidermal
factor receptor (EGFR), KIT (CD117) and HER2 were detected in 100%, 67%, 33% and 0% of cases, respectively.The CDKN2A (p16) and CDKN2B (p15) loci on chromosome 9p21 are frequently deleted in chordomas Another study found
and CDKN2B (p15) loci on chromosome 9p21 are frequently deleted in chordomas Another study found CDKN2A immunoreactivity in just 4% of cases.62% of chordomas express the High Molecular Weight Melanoma Associated Antigen, also known as Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 4 (CSPG4) which has been the target of
chordoma are rare, with an estimated rate of 0.4% in all Chordomas.In 2015 the first consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of chordoma were published in The Lancet Oncology.There are three histological variants of chordoma: classical (or "conventional"), chondroid and
.In 2015 the first consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of chordoma were published in The Lancet Oncology.There are three histological variants of chordoma: classical (or "conventional"), chondroid and dedifferentiated.The histological appearance of classical chordoma is of a lobulated tumor composed
classical (or "conventional"), chondroid and dedifferentiated.The histological appearance of classical chordoma is of a lobulated tumor composed of groups of cells separated by fibrous septa. The cells have small round nuclei and abundant vacuolated cytoplasm, sometimes described as physaliferous (having bubbles or vacuoles).Chondroid
offers the best chance of long-term control. Incomplete resection of the primary tumor makes controlling the disease more difficult and increases the odds of recurrence. The decision whether complete or incomplete surgery should be performed primarily depends on the anatomical location of the tumor and its proximity to vital
the anatomical location of the tumor and its proximity to vital parts of the central nervous system.Chordomas are relatively radioresistant, requiring high doses of radiation to be controlled. The proximity of chordomas to vital neurological structures such as the brain stem and nerves limits the dose of radiation that
proximity to vital parts of the central nervous system.Chordomas are relatively radioresistant, requiring high doses of radiation to be controlled. The proximity of chordomas to vital neurological structures such as the brain stem and nerves limits the dose of radiation that can safely be delivered. Therefore, highly
high doses of radiation to be controlled. The proximity of chordomas to vital neurological structures such as the brain stem and nerves limits the dose of radiation that can safely be delivered. Therefore, highly focused radiation such as proton therapy and carbon ion therapy are more effective than conventional x
Though EGFR mutation is not present in chordoma yet EGFR expression might predict response to erlotinib (as shown in report by Dr Sameer Rastogi).A report of response to olaparib has been published.In one study, the 10-year tumor free survival rate for sacral chordoma was 46%.
for sacral chordoma was 46%. Chondroid chordomas appear to have a more indolent clinical course.In the United States, the annual incidence of chordoma is approximately 1 in one million (300 new patients each year).There are currently no known environmental risk factors for chordoma. As noted above
approximately 1 in one million (300 new patients each year).There are currently no known environmental risk factors for chordoma. As noted above germline duplication of brachyury has been identified as a major susceptibility mechanism in several chordoma families.While most people with chordoma have no other family members with the
, women with BRCA1/2 mutation have a 5% risk of developing primary peritoneal cancer even after prophylactic oophorectomy.Primary peritoneal carcinoma shows similar rates of tumor suppressor gene dysfunction (p53, BRCA, WT1) as ovarian cancer and can also show an increased expression of HER-2/neu.
that may have lethal sequelae.The malignant tumors of the heart have a worse prognosis. Cardiac sarcomas generally lead to death within 2 years of diagnosis, due to rapid infiltration of the myocardium of the heart and obstruction of the normal flow of blood within the heart.Cardiac fibroma
generally lead to death within 2 years of diagnosis, due to rapid infiltration of the myocardium of the heart and obstruction of the normal flow of blood within the heart.Cardiac fibroma
(c-SCLC), and are (usually) treated as "pure" SCLC.Adenocarcinoma of the lung is currently the most common type of lung cancer in "never smokers" (lifelong nonsmokers). Adenocarcinomas account for about 40% of lung cancers. Historically, adenocarcinoma was
lung is currently the most common type of lung cancer in "never smokers" (lifelong nonsmokers). Adenocarcinomas account for about 40% of lung cancers. Historically, adenocarcinoma was more often seen peripherally in the lungs than SCLC and squamous-cell lung cancer, both of which
Squamous-cell carcinoma (SCC) of the lung is more common in men than in women. It is closely correlated with a history of tobacco smoking, more so than most other types of lung cancer. According to the Nurses' Health Study, the relative risk of SCC
is more common in men than in women. It is closely correlated with a history of tobacco smoking, more so than most other types of lung cancer. According to the Nurses' Health Study, the relative risk of SCC is around 5.5, both among those with a previous
cancer. According to the Nurses' Health Study, the relative risk of SCC is around 5.5, both among those with a previous duration of smoking of 1 to 20 years, and those with 20 to 30 years, compared to "never smokers" (lifelong nonsmokers).
lung. LCLCs have typically comprised around 10% of all NSCLC in the past, although newer diagnostic techniques seem to be reducing the incidence of diagnosis of "classic" LCLC in favor of more poorly differentiated SCCs and adenocarcinomas. LCLC is, in effect, a "diagnosis of
of diagnosis of "classic" LCLC in favor of more poorly differentiated SCCs and adenocarcinomas. LCLC is, in effect, a "diagnosis of exclusion", in that the tumor cells lack light microscopic characteristics that would classify the neoplasm as a small-cell carcinoma, squamous-
characteristics that would classify the neoplasm as a small-cell carcinoma, squamous-cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or other more specific histologic type of lung cancer. LCLC is differentiated from SCLC primarily by the larger size of the anaplastic cells, a higher cytoplasmic-to-nuclear size
cancer has spread. Some of the symptoms of less advanced cancer include chronic cough, coughing up blood, chest pain, hoarseness, shortness of breath, wheezing, chest pain, weight loss, and loss of appetite. A few more symptoms associated with the early progression of the
chronic cough, coughing up blood, chest pain, hoarseness, shortness of breath, wheezing, chest pain, weight loss, and loss of appetite. A few more symptoms associated with the early progression of the disease are feeling weak, being very tired, having trouble swallowing,
system changes (headache, weakness, dizziness, balance problems, seizures), jaundice, lumps near the surface of the body, numbness of extremities due to Pancoast syndrome, and nausea, vomiting, and constipation brought on by hypercalcemia. Some more of the symptoms that indicate further
and nausea, vomiting, and constipation brought on by hypercalcemia. Some more of the symptoms that indicate further progression of the cancer include shortness of breath, superior vena cava syndrome, trouble swallowing, large amounts of mucus, weakness, fatigue, and hoarseness.Smoking is by far
more of the symptoms that indicate further progression of the cancer include shortness of breath, superior vena cava syndrome, trouble swallowing, large amounts of mucus, weakness, fatigue, and hoarseness.Smoking is by far the leading risk factor for lung cancer. Cigarette smoke contains more than
the leading risk factor for lung cancer. Cigarette smoke contains more than 6,000 components, many of which lead to DNA damage (see table of tobacco-related DNA damages in Tobacco smoking).Other causes include radon, exposure to secondhand smoke, exposure to substances such as asbestos, chromium,
, exposure to secondhand smoke, exposure to substances such as asbestos, chromium, nickel, beryllium, soot, or tar, family history of lung cancer, and air pollution.In general, DNA damage appears to be the primary underlying cause of cancer. Though most DNA damages
, or tar, family history of lung cancer, and air pollution.In general, DNA damage appears to be the primary underlying cause of cancer. Though most DNA damages are repairable, leftover unrepaired DNA damages from cigarette smoke are the likely cause of NSCLC.DNA replication past an unrepaired
be the primary underlying cause of cancer. Though most DNA damages are repairable, leftover unrepaired DNA damages from cigarette smoke are the likely cause of NSCLC.DNA replication past an unrepaired damage can give rise to a mutation because of inaccurate translesion synthesis.  In addition, during repair of DNA
translesion synthesis.  In addition, during repair of DNA double-strand breaks, or repair of other DNA damages, incompletely cleared sites of repair can lead to epigenetic gene silencing.Deficiencies in DNA repair underlie many forms of cancer. If DNA repair is deficient, the frequency
or repair of other DNA damages, incompletely cleared sites of repair can lead to epigenetic gene silencing.Deficiencies in DNA repair underlie many forms of cancer. If DNA repair is deficient, the frequency of unrepaired DNA damages increases, and these tend to cause inaccurate translesion synthesis leading to
, leading to epigenetic alterations.As indicated as in the article Carcinogenesis, mutations in DNA repair genes occasionally occur in cancer, but deficiencies of DNA repair due to epigenetic alterations that reduce or silence DNA repair-gene expression occur much more frequently in cancer.Epigenetic gene silencing of
of DNA repair due to epigenetic alterations that reduce or silence DNA repair-gene expression occur much more frequently in cancer.Epigenetic gene silencing of DNA repair genes occurs frequently in NSCLC.  At least nine DNA repair genes that normally function in relatively accurate DNA repair pathways are often
inaccurate DNA repair pathway, is expressed at an increased level due to hypo-, rather than hyper-, methylation of its promoter region (deficiency of promoter methylation) in NSCLC.The frequent deficiencies in accurate DNA repair, and the increase in inaccurate repair, likely cause the high level of mutation
deficiency of promoter methylation) in NSCLC.The frequent deficiencies in accurate DNA repair, and the increase in inaccurate repair, likely cause the high level of mutation in lung cancer cells of more than 100,000 mutations per genome (see Whole genome sequencing).Staging is a formal procedure to determine how developed the
survival rate is 47%, stage II is 30%, stage III is 10%, and stage IV is 1%.More than one kind of treatment is often used, depending on the stage of the cancer, the individual's overall health, age, response to chemotherapy, and
cavity.NSCLCs are usually not very sensitive to chemotherapy and/or radiation, so surgery (lung resection to remove the tumor) remains the treatment of choice if patients are diagnosed at an early stage.If the persons have a small, but inoperable tumor, they may undergo highly targeted
. Nodules less than 1 cm from the trachea, main bronchi, oesophagus, and central vessels should be excluded from RFA given high risk of complications and frequent incomplete ablation. Additionally, lesions greater than 5 cm should be excluded and lesions 3 to 5 cm should be considered with
ablation. Additionally, lesions greater than 5 cm should be excluded and lesions 3 to 5 cm should be considered with caution given high risk of recurrence. As a minimally invasive procedure, it can be a safer alternative for patients who are poor candidates for surgery due to comorbidities or
overall survival of the patients. It is possible that RFA followed by radiation therapy has a survival benefit due to synergism of the two mechanisms of cell destruction.The treatment approach for people who have advanced NSCLC is first aimed at relieving pain and distress (palliative), but a
.The treatment approach for people who have advanced NSCLC is first aimed at relieving pain and distress (palliative), but a wide variety of chemotherapy options exists. These agents include both traditional chemotherapies, such as cisplatin, which indiscriminately target all rapidly dividing cells, and newer targeted
, which indiscriminately target all rapidly dividing cells, and newer targeted agents, which are more tailored to specific genetic aberrations found within a person's tumor. When choosing an appropriate chemotherapy approach, the toxicity profile (side effects of the drug) should be taken into account and balanced
When choosing an appropriate chemotherapy approach, the toxicity profile (side effects of the drug) should be taken into account and balanced with the person's comorbidities (other conditions or side effects that the person is experiencing). Carboplatin is a chemotherapy agent that has a similar effect on a
choosing an appropriate chemotherapy approach, the toxicity profile (side effects of the drug) should be taken into account and balanced with the person's comorbidities (other conditions or side effects that the person is experiencing). Carboplatin is a chemotherapy agent that has a similar effect on a
(other conditions or side effects that the person is experiencing). Carboplatin is a chemotherapy agent that has a similar effect on a person's survival when compared to cisplatin, and has a different toxicity profile from cisplatin.At present, two genetic markers are routinely profiled in NSCLC
overall survival when compared to standard chemotherapy alone.Thermal ablations, i.e. RFA, cryoablation, and microwave ablation, are appropriate for palliative treatment of tumor-related symptoms or recurrences within treatment fields. People with severe pulmonary fibrosis and severe emphysema with a life expectancy less than a year
severe pulmonary fibrosis and severe emphysema with a life expectancy less than a year should be considered poor candidates for this treatment.Roughly 10–35% of people who have NSCLC will have drug-sensitizing mutations of the EGFR. The distribution of these mutations has been found to be race-
to certain medications that block the EGFR protein known as tyrosine kinase inhibitors specifically, erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib, or osimertinib.Reliable identification of mutations in lung cancer needs careful consideration due to the variable sensitivity of diagnostic techniques.Up to 7% of NSCLC patients have EML4-
EML4-ALK translocations or mutations in the ROS1 gene; these patients may benefit from ALK inhibitors, which are now approved for this subset of patients. Crizotinib, which gained FDA approval in August 2011, is an inhibitor of several kinases, specifically ALK, ROS1, and MET
cells expressing programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) could interact with programmed death receptor 1 (PD-1) expressed on the surface of T cells, and result in decreased tumor cell kill by the immune system. Atezolizumab is an anti PD-L1 monoclonal antibody. Nivolumab
anti PD-1 monoclonal antibodies. Ipilimumab is a monoclonal antibody that targets Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) on the surface of T cells. Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody that targets Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) in the circulation and functions as an angiogenesis inhibitor
a second-line treatment, but if the cancer has EGFR or ALK mutations, agents targeting those mutations should be used first. Assessment of PDL1 must be conducted with a validated and approved companion diagnostic.The prognosis of patients with non small cell lung cancer improved significantly in the
, agents targeting those mutations should be used first. Assessment of PDL1 must be conducted with a validated and approved companion diagnostic.The prognosis of patients with non small cell lung cancer improved significantly in the last years with the introduction of immunotherapy. Patients with tumor PDL-1 expressed over half
a validated and approved companion diagnostic.The prognosis of patients with non small cell lung cancer improved significantly in the last years with the introduction of immunotherapy. Patients with tumor PDL-1 expressed over half or more of the tumor cells achieved a median overall survival of 30 months with pembrolizumab.
to the development of abnormal cells that have the ability to invade or spread to other parts of the body. There are three main types of skin cancers: basal-cell skin cancer (BCC), squamous-cell skin cancer (SCC) and melanoma. The first two
damage the tissue around it but is unlikely to spread to distant areas or result in death. It often appears as a painless raised area of skin that may be shiny with small blood vessels running over it or may present as a raised area with an ulcer. Squamous-cell
in size, shape, color, has irregular edges, has more than one color, is itchy or bleeds.More than 90% of cases are caused by exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. This exposure increases the risk of all three main types of skin cancer.
than 90% of cases are caused by exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. This exposure increases the risk of all three main types of skin cancer. Exposure has increased, partly due to a thinner ozone layer. Tanning beds are another common source of ultraviolet radiation. For
all three main types of skin cancer. Exposure has increased, partly due to a thinner ozone layer. Tanning beds are another common source of ultraviolet radiation. For melanomas and basal-cell cancers, exposure during childhood is particularly harmful. For squamous-cell skin cancers, total
For squamous-cell skin cancers, total exposure, irrespective of when it occurs, is more important. Between 20% and 30% of melanomas develop from moles. People with lighter skin are at higher risk as are those with poor immune function such as from medications or HIV
with poor immune function such as from medications or HIV/AIDS. Diagnosis is by biopsy.Decreasing exposure to ultraviolet radiation and the use of sunscreen appear to be effective methods of preventing melanoma and squamous-cell skin cancer. It is not clear if sunscreen affects the risk of
medications such as fluorouracil. Immunotherapy might be the only hope for individuals with multiple malignancies such as Xeroderma Pigmentosum and Gorlin syndrome.  Treatment of melanoma may involve some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and targeted therapy. In those people whose disease has spread to other areas
might be the only hope for individuals with multiple malignancies such as Xeroderma Pigmentosum and Gorlin syndrome.  Treatment of melanoma may involve some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and targeted therapy. In those people whose disease has spread to other areas of the body, palliative care
and targeted therapy. In those people whose disease has spread to other areas of the body, palliative care may be used to improve quality of life. Melanoma has one of the higher survival rates among cancers, with over 86% of people in the UK and more than 90
palliative care may be used to improve quality of life. Melanoma has one of the higher survival rates among cancers, with over 86% of people in the UK and more than 90% in the United States surviving more than 5 years.Skin cancer is the most common form
people in the UK and more than 90% in the United States surviving more than 5 years.Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer, globally accounting for at least 40% of cancer cases. The most common type is nonmelanoma skin cancer, which occurs in at
the United States surviving more than 5 years.Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer, globally accounting for at least 40% of cancer cases. The most common type is nonmelanoma skin cancer, which occurs in at least 2–3 million people per year. This is a
, melanoma occurred in 232,000 people and resulted in 55,000 deaths. White people in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa have the highest rates of melanoma in the world. The three main types of skin cancer have become more common in the last 20 to 40 years, especially in
deaths. White people in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa have the highest rates of melanoma in the world. The three main types of skin cancer have become more common in the last 20 to 40 years, especially in those areas with mostly White people.There are three
have become more common in the last 20 to 40 years, especially in those areas with mostly White people.There are three main types of skin cancer: basal-cell skin cancer (basal-cell carcinoma) (BCC), squamous-cell skin cancer (squamous-
Crusting and bleeding in the center of the tumor frequently develops. It is often mistaken for a sore that does not heal. This form of skin cancer is the least deadly, and with proper treatment can be completely eliminated, often without significant scarring.Squamous-cell skin cancer
most common skin cancer. It is dangerous, but not nearly as dangerous as a melanoma.Most melanoma consist of various colours from shades of brown to black. A small number of melanoma are pink, red or fleshy in colour; these are called amelanotic melanoma and tend to
, but not nearly as dangerous as a melanoma.Most melanoma consist of various colours from shades of brown to black. A small number of melanoma are pink, red or fleshy in colour; these are called amelanotic melanoma and tend to be more aggressive. Warning signs of malignant
tender red, purple or skin colored bumps that are not painful or itchy.  They may be mistaken for a cyst or another type of cancer.Ultraviolet radiation from sun exposure is the primary environmental cause of skin cancer. This can occur in professions such as farming. Other
itchy.  They may be mistaken for a cyst or another type of cancer.Ultraviolet radiation from sun exposure is the primary environmental cause of skin cancer. This can occur in professions such as farming. Other risk factors that play a role include:Light skin color Age Smoking
tobaccoHPV infections increase the risk of squamous-cell skin cancer.Some genetic syndromes including congenital melanocytic nevi syndrome which is characterized by the presence of nevi (birthmarks or moles) of varying size which are either present at birth, or appear within 6 months of birth. Nevi larger
characterized by the presence of nevi (birthmarks or moles) of varying size which are either present at birth, or appear within 6 months of birth. Nevi larger than 20 mm (3/4") in size are at higher risk for becoming cancerous.Chronic non-healing wounds
X-rays, environmental carcinogens, and artificial UV radiation (e.g. tanning beds). It is believed that tanning beds are the cause of hundreds of thousands of basal and squamous-cell skin cancer. The World Health Organization now places people who use artificial tanning beds in its
rays, environmental carcinogens, and artificial UV radiation (e.g. tanning beds). It is believed that tanning beds are the cause of hundreds of thousands of basal and squamous-cell skin cancer. The World Health Organization now places people who use artificial tanning beds in its highest risk
now places people who use artificial tanning beds in its highest risk category for skin cancer. Alcohol consumption, specifically excessive drinking increase the risk of sunburns.The use of many immunosuppressive medications increases the risk of skin cancer. Cyclosporin A, a calcineurin inhibitor for example increases the risk
category for skin cancer. Alcohol consumption, specifically excessive drinking increase the risk of sunburns.The use of many immunosuppressive medications increases the risk of skin cancer. Cyclosporin A, a calcineurin inhibitor for example increases the risk approximately 200 times, and azathioprine about 60 times.Deliberate exposure
assisted diagnosis devices have been developed that analyze images from a dermatoscope or spectroscopy and can be used by a diagnostician to aid in the detection of skin cancer. CAD systems have been found to be highly sensitive in the detection of melanoma, but have a high false-positive rate
be used by a diagnostician to aid in the detection of skin cancer. CAD systems have been found to be highly sensitive in the detection of melanoma, but have a high false-positive rate. There is not yet enough evidence to recommend CAD as compared to traditional diagnostic methods
enough evidence to recommend CAD as compared to traditional diagnostic methods.High-frequency ultrasound (HFUS) is of unclear usefulness in the diagnosis of skin cancer. There is insufficient evidence for reflectance confocal microscopy to diagnose basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma or any other skin cancers.Sunscreen
and squamous-cell carcinoma. There is little evidence that it is effective in preventing basal-cell carcinoma. Other advice to reduce rates of skin cancer includes avoiding sunburning, wearing protective clothing, sunglasses and hats, and attempting to avoid sun exposure or periods of peak exposure.
to reduce rates of skin cancer includes avoiding sunburning, wearing protective clothing, sunglasses and hats, and attempting to avoid sun exposure or periods of peak exposure. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that people between 9 and 25 years of age be advised to avoid ultraviolet light.
and attempting to avoid sun exposure or periods of peak exposure. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that people between 9 and 25 years of age be advised to avoid ultraviolet light.The risk of developing skin cancer can be reduced through a number of measures including decreasing indoor tanning
between 9 and 25 years of age be advised to avoid ultraviolet light.The risk of developing skin cancer can be reduced through a number of measures including decreasing indoor tanning and mid day sun exposure, increasing the use of sunscreen, and avoiding the use of tobacco products.There
risk of developing skin cancer can be reduced through a number of measures including decreasing indoor tanning and mid day sun exposure, increasing the use of sunscreen, and avoiding the use of tobacco products.There is insufficient evidence either for or against screening for skin cancers. Vitamin supplements and
reduced through a number of measures including decreasing indoor tanning and mid day sun exposure, increasing the use of sunscreen, and avoiding the use of tobacco products.There is insufficient evidence either for or against screening for skin cancers. Vitamin supplements and antioxidant supplements have not been found to
and titanium oxide are often used in sun screen to provide broad protection from UVA and UVB ranges.Eating certain foods may decrease the risk of sunburns but this is much less than the protection provided by sunscreen.A meta-analysis of skin cancer prevention in high risk individuals found
.Eating certain foods may decrease the risk of sunburns but this is much less than the protection provided by sunscreen.A meta-analysis of skin cancer prevention in high risk individuals found evidence that topical application of T4N5 liposome lotion reduced the rate of appearance of basal cell carcinomas in
sunscreen.A meta-analysis of skin cancer prevention in high risk individuals found evidence that topical application of T4N5 liposome lotion reduced the rate of appearance of basal cell carcinomas in people with xeroderma pigmentosum, and that acitretin taken by mouth may have a skin protective benefit in people following
, and that acitretin taken by mouth may have a skin protective benefit in people following kidney transplant.Treatment is dependent on the specific type of cancer, location of the cancer, age of the person, and whether the cancer is primary or a recurrence. For a small basal
cancer off) can provide adequate control of the disease; all of them, however, may have lower overall cure rates than certain type of surgery. Other modalities of treatment such as photodynamic therapy, epidermal radioisotope therapy, topical chemotherapy, electrodesiccation and curettage can be found in the
adequate control of the disease; all of them, however, may have lower overall cure rates than certain type of surgery. Other modalities of treatment such as photodynamic therapy, epidermal radioisotope therapy, topical chemotherapy, electrodesiccation and curettage can be found in the discussions of basal-cell
amount of surrounding tissue and the edges are checked immediately to see if tumor is found. This provides the opportunity to remove the least amount of tissue and provide the best cosmetically favorable results. This is especially important for areas where excess skin is limited, such as the face.
perform this technique.  An alternative method is CCPDMA and can be performed by a pathologist not familiar with Mohs surgery.In the case of disease that has spread (metastasized), further surgical procedures or chemotherapy may be required.Treatments for metastatic melanoma include biologic immunotherapy agents ipilimumab
nivolumab; BRAF inhibitors, such as vemurafenib and dabrafenib; and a MEK inhibitor trametinib.Currently, surgical excision is the most common form of treatment for skin cancers. The goal of reconstructive surgery is restoration of normal appearance and function. The choice of technique in reconstruction is dictated
is the most common form of treatment for skin cancers. The goal of reconstructive surgery is restoration of normal appearance and function. The choice of technique in reconstruction is dictated by the size and location of the defect. Excision and reconstruction of facial skin cancers is generally more challenging due
dressing is placed atop the graft for seven to ten days, to immobilize the graft as it heals in place. There are two forms of skin grafting: split thickness and full thickness. In a split thickness skin graft, a shaver is used to shave a layer of skin
forms of skin grafting: split thickness and full thickness. In a split thickness skin graft, a shaver is used to shave a layer of skin from the abdomen or thigh. The donor site regenerates skin and heals over a period of two weeks. In a full thickness skin
or thigh. The donor site regenerates skin and heals over a period of two weeks. In a full thickness skin graft, a segment of skin is totally removed and the donor site needs to be sutured closed.Split thickness grafts can be used to repair larger defects, but
. An example of such reconstruction is a pedicled forehead flap for repair of a large nasal skin defect. Once the flap develops a source of blood supply form its new bed, the vascular pedicle can be detached.The mortality rate of basal-cell and squamous-cell carcinoma
cell and squamous-cell carcinoma is around 0.3%, causing 2000 deaths per year in the US. In comparison, the mortality rate of melanoma is 15–20% and it causes 6500 deaths per year. Even though it is much less common, malignant melanoma is responsible for 75
rate with Mohs' micrographic surgery was around 95 percent for recurrent basal cell carcinoma.Australia and New Zealand exhibit one of the highest rates of skin cancer incidence in the world, almost four times the rates registered in the United States, the UK and Canada. Around 434,000 people
Canada. Around 434,000 people receive treatment for non-melanoma skin cancers and 10,300 are treated for melanoma. Melanoma is the most common type of cancer in people between 15–44 years in both countries. The incidence of skin cancer has been increasing. The incidence of melanoma among Auckland residents
and 10,300 are treated for melanoma. Melanoma is the most common type of cancer in people between 15–44 years in both countries. The incidence of skin cancer has been increasing. The incidence of melanoma among Auckland residents of European descent in 1995 was 77.7 cases per 100,000 people per year
the most common type of cancer in people between 15–44 years in both countries. The incidence of skin cancer has been increasing. The incidence of melanoma among Auckland residents of European descent in 1995 was 77.7 cases per 100,000 people per year, and was predicted to increase in the 21st
to melanoma and 31,000 of which are due to non-melanoma skin cancers. This is up from 51,000 in 1990.More than 3.5 million cases of skin cancer are diagnosed annually in the United States, which makes it the most common form of cancer in that country. One in five
from 51,000 in 1990.More than 3.5 million cases of skin cancer are diagnosed annually in the United States, which makes it the most common form of cancer in that country. One in five Americans will develop skin cancer at some point of their lives. The most common form of skin
form of cancer in that country. One in five Americans will develop skin cancer at some point of their lives. The most common form of skin cancer is basal-cell carcinoma, followed by squamous cell carcinoma. Unlike for other cancers, there exists no basal and squamous cell
the US in 2008, 59,695 people were diagnosed with melanoma, and 8,623 people died from it. In Australia more than 12,500 new cases of melanoma are reported each year, out of which more than 1,500 die from the disease. Australia has the highest per capita incidence of melanoma
cases of melanoma are reported each year, out of which more than 1,500 die from the disease. Australia has the highest per capita incidence of melanoma in the world.Although the rates of many cancers in the United States is falling, the incidence of melanoma keeps growing, with
the highest per capita incidence of melanoma in the world.Although the rates of many cancers in the United States is falling, the incidence of melanoma keeps growing, with approximately 68,729 melanomas diagnosed in 2004 according to reports of the National Cancer Institute.Melanoma is the fifth most common
American Association for Respiratory CareAmerican College of Chest PhysiciansAmerican Lung AssociationAmerican Thoracic SocietyBritish Thoracic SocietyEuropean Respiratory SocietyOne of the first major discoveries relevant to the field of pulmonology was the discovery of pulmonary circulation. Originally, it was thought that blood reaching the right side of the heart passed through small '
' organization of the American Thoracic Society, the National Association for the Study and Prevention of Tuberculosis. The care, treatment, and study of tuberculosis of the lung is recognised as a discipline in its own right, phthisiology. When the specialty did begin to evolve, several discoveries
become board certified in pulmonary and critical care medicine simultaneously. Interventional pulmonology is a relatively new field within pulmonary medicine that deals with the use of procedures such as bronchoscopy and pleuroscopy to treat several pulmonary diseases. Interventional pulmonology is increasingly recognized as a specific medical specialty.The pulmonologist begins
deficiency)exposure to toxicants (tobacco smoke, asbestos, exhaust fumes, coal mining fumes, e-cigarette aerosol,)exposure to infectious agents (certain types of birds, malt processing)an autoimmune diathesis that might predispose to certain conditions (pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension)Physical diagnostics are as important as in other fields
birds, malt processing)an autoimmune diathesis that might predispose to certain conditions (pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension)Physical diagnostics are as important as in other fields of medicine.Inspection of the hands for signs of cyanosis or clubbing, chest wall, and respiratory rate.Palpation of the cervical lymph nodes
to certain conditions (pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension)Physical diagnostics are as important as in other fields of medicine.Inspection of the hands for signs of cyanosis or clubbing, chest wall, and respiratory rate.Palpation of the cervical lymph nodes, trachea and chest wall movement.Percussion of
give pulmonary signs, a thorough cardiac investigation is usually included.Pulmonary clinical procedures include the following pulmonary tests and procedures:Medical laboratory investigation of blood (blood tests). Sometimes arterial blood gas measurements are also required.Spirometry the determination of maximum airflow at a given lung volume
Pulmonary Function Tests including spirometry, as above, plus response to bronchodilators, lung volumes, and diffusion capacity, the latter being a measure of lung oxygen absorptive areaBronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), endobronchial and transbronchial biopsy and epithelial brushingChest X-raysCT scanScintigraphy and other methods of
X-raysCT scanScintigraphy and other methods of nuclear medicinePositron emission tomography (especially in lung cancer)Polysomnography (sleep studies) commonly used for the diagnosis of sleep apneaMajor surgical procedures on the heart and lungs are performed by a thoracic surgeon. Pulmonologists often perform specialized procedures to get samples from the
They use radiographic techniques to view vasculature of the lungs and heart to assist with diagnosis.Medication is the most important treatment of most diseases of pulmonology, either by inhalation (bronchodilators and steroids) or in oral form (antibiotics, leukotriene antagonists). A common example being the
, either by inhalation (bronchodilators and steroids) or in oral form (antibiotics, leukotriene antagonists). A common example being the usage of inhalers in the treatment of inflammatory lung conditions such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Oxygen therapy is often necessary in severe respiratory disease
and pulmonary fibrosis). When this is insufficient, the patient might require mechanical ventilation.Pulmonary rehabilitation has been defined as a multidimensional continuum of services directed to persons with pulmonary disease and their families, usually by an interdisciplinary team of specialists, with the goal of achieving and maintaining
Pulmonary rehabilitation has been defined as a multidimensional continuum of services directed to persons with pulmonary disease and their families, usually by an interdisciplinary team of specialists, with the goal of achieving and maintaining the individual's maximum level of independence and functioning in the community. Pulmonary rehabilitation is intended
pulmonary disease and their families, usually by an interdisciplinary team of specialists, with the goal of achieving and maintaining the individual's maximum level of independence and functioning in the community. Pulmonary rehabilitation is intended to educate the patient, the family, and improve the overall quality of life
level of independence and functioning in the community. Pulmonary rehabilitation is intended to educate the patient, the family, and improve the overall quality of life and prognosis for the patient. Interventions can include exercise, education, emotional support, oxygen, noninvasive mechanical ventilation, optimization of airway
quality of life and prognosis for the patient. Interventions can include exercise, education, emotional support, oxygen, noninvasive mechanical ventilation, optimization of airway secretion clearance, promoting compliance with medical care to reduce numbers of exacerbations and hospitalizations, and returning to work and/or a more active and
, education, emotional support, oxygen, noninvasive mechanical ventilation, optimization of airway secretion clearance, promoting compliance with medical care to reduce numbers of exacerbations and hospitalizations, and returning to work and/or a more active and emotionally satisfying life. These goals are appropriate for any patients with diminished
who, after receiving a medical degree (MD or DO), complete residency training in pediatrics, followed by at least three additional years of subspeciality fellowship training in pulmonology.Physician Assistants commonly work in collaboration with physicians in the field of pulmonology.Pulmonologists are involved in both clinical
, followed by at least three additional years of subspeciality fellowship training in pulmonology.Physician Assistants commonly work in collaboration with physicians in the field of pulmonology.Pulmonologists are involved in both clinical and basic research of the respiratory system, ranging from the anatomy of the respiratory epithelium to the
may be birth defects resulting from errors during development of the embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information
embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information or providing regulatory functions at somatic sites.Extragonadal GCTs were
classes reflect an important clinical difference. Compared to germinomatous tumors, nongerminomatous tumors tend to grow faster, have an earlier mean age at time of diagnosis ( around 25 years versus 35 years, in the case of testicular cancers), and have a lower five-year survival rate
radiation, and they also respond well to chemotherapy.  The prognosis for nongerminomatous tumours has improved dramatically, however, due to the use of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens.Mixed germ cell tumors occur in many forms.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal
.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal sinus tumor.Teratocarcinoma refers to a germ cell tumor that is a mixture of teratoma with embryonal carcinoma, or with choriocarcinoma, or with both.  This kind of mixed germ cell tumor may be known simply as
neonates, infants, and children younger than 4 years, most are sacrococcygeal teratomas.Males with Klinefelter syndrome have a 50 times greater risk of GSTs.  In these persons, GSTs usually contain nonseminomatous elements, present at an earlier age, and seldom are gonadal in location.
are being evaluated for tumors that do not respond to chemotherapy.The 1997 International Germ Cell Consensus Classification is a tool for estimating the risk of relapse after treatment of malignant germ-cell tumor.A small study of ovarian tumors in girls reports a correlation between cystic and benign tumors
can be estimated by ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan before surgery, this permits selection of the most appropriate surgical plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found
plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found that for 454 men with nonseminomatous (nongerminomatous) GCTs diagnosed between 1975 and 1989, five-year survival increased over
originating in the nasopharynx, most commonly in the postero-lateral nasopharynx or pharyngeal recess (fossa of Rosenmüller), accounting for 50% of cases. NPC occurs in children and adults.  NPC differs significantly from other cancers of the head and neck in its occurrence, causes
. It is most common in males. It is a squamous cell carcinoma of an undifferentiated type. Squamous epithelial cells are a flat type of cell found in the skin and the membranes that line some body cavities. Differentiation means how different the cancer cells are from normal cells.
obstruction or bleeding and a "nasal twang". Metastatic spread may result in bone pain or organ dysfunction. Rarely, a paraneoplastic syndrome of osteoarthropathy (diseases of joints and bones) may occur with widespread disease.NPC is caused by a combination of factors: viral, environmental
a "nasal twang". Metastatic spread may result in bone pain or organ dysfunction. Rarely, a paraneoplastic syndrome of osteoarthropathy (diseases of joints and bones) may occur with widespread disease.NPC is caused by a combination of factors: viral, environmental influences, and heredity
Rarely, a paraneoplastic syndrome of osteoarthropathy (diseases of joints and bones) may occur with widespread disease.NPC is caused by a combination of factors: viral, environmental influences, and heredity.  The viral influence is associated with infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
does Epstein-Barr virus lead to cancer, which suggests a variety of influencing factors.  Other likely causes include genetic susceptibility, consumption of food (in particular salted fish) containing carcinogenic volatile nitrosamines. Various mutations that activate NF-κB signalling have been reported in almost half
preliminary evaluation has suggested that human papillomavirus (HPV) may be associated. EBV DNA was detectable in the blood plasma samples of 96% of patients with non-keratinizing NPC, compared with only 7% in controls. The detection of nuclear antigen associated with Epstein-Barr virus
More importantly, EBV DNA levels appear to correlate with treatment response and may predict disease recurrence, suggesting that they may be an independent indicator of prognosis. The mechanism by which EBV alters nasopharyngeal cells is being elucidated to provide a rational therapeutic target.It is also being investigated as
being elucidated to provide a rational therapeutic target.It is also being investigated as to whether or not chronic sinusitis could be a potential cause of cancer of the nasopharynx. It is hypothesised that this may happen in a way similar to how chronic inflammatory conditions in other parts of the
(a recess behind the entrance of the eustachian tube opening). The World Health Organization classifies nasopharyngeal carcinoma in three types, in order of frequency: Non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma; keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma; and basaloid squamous cell carcinoma. The tumor must show evidence of
neck disease, and/or any distant metastasis.						Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, classified was a squamous cell cancer, has not been linked to excessive use of tobacco. However, there are certain risk factors that can predispose an individual to NPC if exposed to them. These risk factors include:
, unknown factors that result in rare familial clusters, and heavy alcohol consumption.Epstein- Barr virus infects and persists in more than 90% of world population. Transmission of this virus occurs through saliva and is more commonly seen in developing countries where there are living areas are more packed
with NPC.Individuals that are exposed to cigarette smoking have an increased risk of developing NPC by 2- to 6-fold. Approximately two-thirds of patients with type 1 NPC was attributed to smoking in the United States. However the declining rates of smoking in the US can be associated
-fold. Approximately two-thirds of patients with type 1 NPC was attributed to smoking in the United States. However the declining rates of smoking in the US can be associated with less prevalence of type 1 NPC. In southern China and North Africa, it has been suggested
1 NPC was attributed to smoking in the United States. However the declining rates of smoking in the US can be associated with less prevalence of type 1 NPC. In southern China and North Africa, it has been suggested that high smoking rates come from wood fires in the country
in the country rather than cigarette smoking.NPC can be treated by surgery, by chemotherapy, or by radiotherapy. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in
, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in the treatments of cancers of the head and neck. The expression of EBV latent proteins within undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma can be potentially exploited for immune-based therapies
if the treatment is working, or if treatment needs to be dropped or changed. Tests that are done after treatment to determine the condition of patient after completing treatment are called follow-up tests and tell the doctor if the patients condition has changed or if the cancer has come
doctor if the patients condition has changed or if the cancer has come back.Radiation therapy uses high energy x-rays or other types of radiation aimed to prevent cancer cells from growing or kill them altogether. This kind of therapy can be administered to the patient externally or internally
therapy uses high energy x-rays or other types of radiation aimed to prevent cancer cells from growing or kill them altogether. This kind of therapy can be administered to the patient externally or internally. With external radiation, a machine is used to send targeted radiation to the cancer
site. A mesh mask is used on the patenting order to keep their head and neck still while the machine rotates to send out beams of radiation. In undergoing this kind of treatment, healthy cells may also be damaged during the process. Therefore, there are 2 other forms
on the patenting order to keep their head and neck still while the machine rotates to send out beams of radiation. In undergoing this kind of treatment, healthy cells may also be damaged during the process. Therefore, there are 2 other forms of radiation therapy that decreases the likelihood
radiation. In undergoing this kind of treatment, healthy cells may also be damaged during the process. Therefore, there are 2 other forms of radiation therapy that decreases the likelihood of damaging nearby healthy cells: intensity-modulated radiation therapy and stereotactic radiation therapy. Intensity-modulated radiation
therapy. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) uses 3D images of the size and shape of the tumor to then direct thin beams of radiation at different intensities from multiple angles. In stereotactic radiation therapy, radiation is aimed directly at the tumor. in this therapy, the
different intensities from multiple angles. In stereotactic radiation therapy, radiation is aimed directly at the tumor. in this therapy, the total amount of radiation is divided into smaller does that will be given over the course of several days.Using radiation therapy as a cancer treatment method depends
does that will be given over the course of several days.Using radiation therapy as a cancer treatment method depends on the type and stage of cancer, however, internal and external radiation therapies can be used to treat NPC. If external radiation therapies are being aimed at the thyroid
blood tests are done before and after radiation to check thyroid hormone levels.Chemotherapy works as cancer treatment by using drugs that stop the growth of cancer cells, by either killing the cells or preventing them from dividing. This kind of therapy can be administered systemically or regionally. Systemic
cancer treatment by using drugs that stop the growth of cancer cells, by either killing the cells or preventing them from dividing. This kind of therapy can be administered systemically or regionally. Systemic chemotherapy is when the chemotherapy is taken orally or is injected into a vein or muscle.
, for example, the abdomen. In this way, the drugs will mainly affect cancer cells in that area. However, the type of chemotherapy that is administered to the patient depends on the type and stage of the cancer. Additionally, chemotherapy can be used as an adjuvant
depends on the type and stage of the cancer. Additionally, chemotherapy can be used as an adjuvant therapy after radiation to lower the risk of recurrence in the patient. If given after radiation, chemotherapy can be used to kill any cancer cells that may have remained.Surgery can

people and resulted in 101,100 deaths in 2015. In the United States, it develops in 6.5 per 100,000 people per year and 0.7% of people are affected at some point in their lives. It usually occurs around the age of 60 and is more common in men than women
<10g/dlBone lesions: one or more osteolytic lesion on skeletal radiography, CT, or PET/CTBone pain affects almost 70% of people with multiple myeloma and is the one of the most common symptoms.  Myeloma bone pain usually involves the spine and ribs, and
a pathological bone fracture. Involvement of the vertebrae may lead to spinal cord compression or kyphosis. Myeloma bone disease is due to the overexpression of receptor activator for nuclear factor κ B ligand (RANKL) by bone marrow stroma. RANKL activates osteoclasts, which resorb bone. The resultant
which may show "punched-out" resorptive lesions (including the "raindrop" appearance of the skull on radiography). The breakdown of bone also leads to the release of calcium ions into the blood, leading to hypercalcemia and its associated symptoms.The anemia found in myeloma
" resorptive lesions (including the "raindrop" appearance of the skull on radiography). The breakdown of bone also leads to the release of calcium ions into the blood, leading to hypercalcemia and its associated symptoms.The anemia found in myeloma is usually normocytic and normochromic. It
normal red blood cell production (hematopoiesis) by cytokines.Impaired kidney function may develop, either acutely or chronically, and with any degree of severity.The most common cause of kidney failure in multiple myeloma is due to proteins secreted by the malignant cells.  Myeloma cells produce
) by cytokines.Impaired kidney function may develop, either acutely or chronically, and with any degree of severity.The most common cause of kidney failure in multiple myeloma is due to proteins secreted by the malignant cells.  Myeloma cells produce monoclonal proteins of varying types, most
.  Depending on the size of these proteins, they may be excreted through the kidneys.  Kidneys can be damaged by the effects of proteins or light chains. Increased bone resorption leads to hypercalcemia and causes nephrocalcinosis, thereby contributing to the kidney failure. Amyloidosis is a distant
causes nephrocalcinosis, thereby contributing to the kidney failure. Amyloidosis is a distant third in the causation.  People with amyloidosis have high levels of amyloid protein that can be excreted through the kidneys and cause damage to the kidneys and other organs.Light chains produce myriad effects that can
K. pneumoniae, while common pathogens causing pyelonephritis include E. coli and other Gram-negative organisms.  The greatest risk period for the occurrence of infection is in the initial few months after the start of chemotherapy. The increased risk of infection is due to immune deficiency.  Although
and other Gram-negative organisms.  The greatest risk period for the occurrence of infection is in the initial few months after the start of chemotherapy. The increased risk of infection is due to immune deficiency.  Although the total immunoglobulin level is typically elevated in multiple myeloma,
.  The greatest risk period for the occurrence of infection is in the initial few months after the start of chemotherapy. The increased risk of infection is due to immune deficiency.  Although the total immunoglobulin level is typically elevated in multiple myeloma, the majority of the antibodies are
is typically elevated in multiple myeloma, the majority of the antibodies are ineffective monoclonal antibodies from the clonal plasma cell.  A selected group of people with documented hypogammaglobulinemia may benefit from replacement immunoglobulin therapy to reduce the risk of infection.Some symptoms (e.g., weakness, confusion,
antibodies from the clonal plasma cell.  A selected group of people with documented hypogammaglobulinemia may benefit from replacement immunoglobulin therapy to reduce the risk of infection.Some symptoms (e.g., weakness, confusion, and fatigue) may be due to anemia or hypercalcemia. Headache, visual changes
weakness, confusion, and fatigue) may be due to anemia or hypercalcemia. Headache, visual changes, and retinopathy may be the result of hyperviscosity  of the blood depending on the properties of the paraprotein. Finally, radicular pain, loss of bowel or bladder control (due
and retinopathy may be the result of hyperviscosity  of the blood depending on the properties of the paraprotein. Finally, radicular pain, loss of bowel or bladder control (due to involvement of spinal cord leading to cord compression) or carpal tunnel syndrome, and other neuropathies (due
3% per year for the next 5 years, and then 1% per year.Obesity is related to multiple myeloma with each increase of body mass index by five increasing the risk by 11%.Studies have reported a familial predisposition to myeloma. Hyperphosphorylation of a number of proteins—the
with each increase of body mass index by five increasing the risk by 11%.Studies have reported a familial predisposition to myeloma. Hyperphosphorylation of a number of proteins—the paratarg proteins—a tendency that is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, appears a common mechanism in these families. This
appears a common mechanism in these families. This tendency is more common in African-American with myeloma and may contribute to the higher rates of myeloma in this group.Rarely, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with multiple myeloma, particularly in individuals who have an
termed Epstein-Barr virus-associated plasma cell myeloma. EBV-positive disease is more common in the plasmacytoma rather than multiple myeloma form of plasma cell cancer. Tissues involved in EBV+ disease typically show foci of EBV+ cells with the appearance of rapidly proliferating immature or poorly differentiated plasma
positive disease is more common in the plasmacytoma rather than multiple myeloma form of plasma cell cancer. Tissues involved in EBV+ disease typically show foci of EBV+ cells with the appearance of rapidly proliferating immature or poorly differentiated plasma cells. The cells express products of EBV genes such as EBER1 and
to progress to multiple myeloma compared to people with EBV-negative plasmacytoma(s). This suggest that EBV may have a role in the progression of plasmacytomas to systemic multiple myeloma.B lymphocytes start in the bone marrow and move to the lymph nodes. As they progress, they mature
generally taken to be either an activated memory B cell or the precursor to plasma cells, the plasmablast.The immune system keeps the proliferation of B cells and the secretion of antibodies under tight control. When chromosomes and genes are damaged, often through rearrangement, this control is lost
activated memory B cell or the precursor to plasma cells, the plasmablast.The immune system keeps the proliferation of B cells and the secretion of antibodies under tight control. When chromosomes and genes are damaged, often through rearrangement, this control is lost. Often, a promoter gene
people with multiple myeloma.  This mutation results in dysregulation of the oncogene which is thought to be an important initiating event in the pathogenesis of myeloma.  The result is a proliferation of a plasma cell clone and genomic instability that leads to further mutations and translocations. The chromosome
cell clone and genomic instability that leads to further mutations and translocations. The chromosome 14 abnormality is observed in about 50% of all cases of myeloma. Deletion of (parts of) chromosome 13 is also observed in about 50% of cases.Production of cytokines (especially IL-6
observed in about 50% of all cases of myeloma. Deletion of (parts of) chromosome 13 is also observed in about 50% of cases.Production of cytokines (especially IL-6) by the plasma cells causes much of their localised damage, such as osteoporosis, and creates
% of all cases of myeloma. Deletion of (parts of) chromosome 13 is also observed in about 50% of cases.Production of cytokines (especially IL-6) by the plasma cells causes much of their localised damage, such as osteoporosis, and creates a microenvironment in which
profile of multiple myeloma cells and normal plasma cells, a gradual demethylation from stem cells to plasma cells was observed. The observed methylation pattern of CpG within intronic regions with enhancer-related chromatin marks in multiple myeloma is similar to undifferentiated precursor and stem cells. These results may represent
PRC2).Increased expression of the PRC2 subunit, EZH2 have been described to be a common feature in multiple myeloma, resulting in an accumulation and redistribution of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation which advances with disease severity.Chromosomal abnormalities commonly found in this disease, like trisomy of multiple odd-numbered
multiple odd-numbered chromosomes, t(11;14), and del(13q), are not associated with a worse prognosis. However, about 25% of patients with newly diagnosed disease have abnormalities associated with a worse prognosis, like t(4;14), t(14;16), and del(17p). Other less
like t(4;14), t(14;16), and del(17p). Other less common abnormalities associated with a worse prognosis include t(14;20) and ≥4 copies of 1q. Associated genetic mutations include ATM, BRAF, CCND1, DIS3, FAM46C, KRAS, NRAS and TP53.The genetic and epigenetic changes occur
KRAS, NRAS and TP53.The genetic and epigenetic changes occur progressively. The initial change, often involving one chromosome 14 translocation, establishes a clone of bone marrow plasma cells that causes the asymptomatic disorder MGUS, which is a premalignant disorder characterized by increased numbers of plasma cells in the bone
translocation, establishes a clone of bone marrow plasma cells that causes the asymptomatic disorder MGUS, which is a premalignant disorder characterized by increased numbers of plasma cells in the bone marrow or the circulation of a myeloma protein immunoglobulin. Further genetic or epigenic changes produce a new clone of bone
numbers of plasma cells in the bone marrow or the circulation of a myeloma protein immunoglobulin. Further genetic or epigenic changes produce a new clone of bone marrow plasma cells, usually descendant from the original clone, that causes the more serious, but still asymptomatic premalignant disorder smoldering multiple myeloma
, that causes the more serious, but still asymptomatic premalignant disorder smoldering multiple myeloma. This myeloma is characterized by a rise in the number of bone marrow plasma cells or levels of the circulating myeloma protein above that seen in MGUS.Subsequent genetic and epigenetic changes lead to a new, more
plasma cells or levels of the circulating myeloma protein above that seen in MGUS.Subsequent genetic and epigenetic changes lead to a new, more aggressive clone of plasma cells, which cause further rises in the level of the circulating myeloma protein, further rises in the number of bone marrow plasma cells
, more aggressive clone of plasma cells, which cause further rises in the level of the circulating myeloma protein, further rises in the number of bone marrow plasma cells, or the development of one or more of a specific set of "CRAB" symptoms, which are the basis
diagnosed fortuitously by detecting a myeloma protein on serum protein electrophoresis tests done for other purposes. MGUS is a relatively stable condition afflicting 3% of people aged 50 and 5% of people aged 70; it progresses to multiple myeloma at a rate of 0.5-1% cases per
on serum protein electrophoresis tests done for other purposes. MGUS is a relatively stable condition afflicting 3% of people aged 50 and 5% of people aged 70; it progresses to multiple myeloma at a rate of 0.5-1% cases per year; smoldering multiple myeloma does so
or M protein) band, with or without reduction of the other (normal) immunoglobulins (known as immune paresis). One type of paraprotein is the Bence Jones protein, which is a urinary paraprotein composed of free light chains.  Quantitative measurements of the paraprotein are necessary
to monitor the disease. The paraprotein is an abnormal immunoglobulin produced by the tumor clone.In theory, multiple myeloma can produce all classes of immunoglobulin, but IgG paraproteins are most common, followed by IgA and IgM. IgD and IgE myeloma are very rare. In addition, light
, followed by IgA and IgM. IgD and IgE myeloma are very rare. In addition, light and or heavy chains (the building blocks of antibodies) may be secreted in isolation: κ- or λ-light chains or any of the five types of heavy chains (α-,
down bone, releasing it into the bloodstream), raised serum creatinine level due to reduced kidney function, which is mainly due to casts of paraprotein deposition in the kidney, although the cast may also contain complete immunoglobulins, Tamm-Horsfall protein and albumin.Other useful laboratory tests
Initial research also suggests that measurement of free light chains may also be used, in conjunction with other markers, for assessment of the risk of progression from MGUS to multiple myeloma.This assay, the serum free light chain assay, has recently been recommended by the International Myeloma Working
serum free light chain assay, has recently been recommended by the International Myeloma Working Group for the screening, diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring of plasma cell dyscrasias.						A bone marrow biopsy is usually performed to estimate the percentage of bone marrow occupied by plasma cells. This percentage
the screening, diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring of plasma cell dyscrasias.						A bone marrow biopsy is usually performed to estimate the percentage of bone marrow occupied by plasma cells. This percentage is used in the diagnostic criteria for myeloma. Immunohistochemistry (staining particular cell types using antibodies
Myeloma and Risk-adapted Therapy (mSMART), which divides people into high-risk and standard-risk categories. People with deletion of chromosome 13 or hypodiploidy by conventional cytogenetics, t(4;14), t(14;16), t(14;20) or 17p- by molecular genetic studies, or with a
have high-risk myeloma.The diagnostic examination of a person with suspected multiple myeloma typically includes a skeletal survey. This is a series of X-rays of the skull, axial skeleton, and proximal long bones. Myeloma activity sometimes appears as "lytic lesions" (with
out lesions" (pepper-pot skull). Lesions may also be sclerotic, which is seen as radiodense. Overall, the radiodensity of myeloma is between −30 and 120 Hounsfield units (HU). Magnetic resonance imaging is more sensitive than simple X-rays in the detection
CT scan is performed to measure the size of soft-tissue plasmacytomas. Bone scans are typically not of any additional value in the workup of people with myeloma (no new bone formation; lytic lesions not well visualized on bone scan).																		In 2003, the IMG agreed
myeloma protein) in either serum or urine and it has to be more than 3g/dL (except in cases of true nonsecretory myeloma)Evidence of end-organ damage felt related to the plasma cell disorder (related organ or tissue impairment, CRAB):HyperCalcemia (corrected calcium >2.75 mmol/
or osteoporosis with compression fractures)Note: Recurrent infections alone in a person who has none of the CRAB features is not sufficient to make the diagnosis of myeloma. People who lack CRAB features, but have evidence of amyloidosis, should be considered as amyloidosis and not myeloma. CRAB-like
who has none of the CRAB features is not sufficient to make the diagnosis of myeloma. People who lack CRAB features, but have evidence of amyloidosis, should be considered as amyloidosis and not myeloma. CRAB-like abnormalities are common with numerous diseases, and these abnormalities must be
and these abnormalities must be felt to be directly attributable to the related plasma cell disorder and every attempt made to rule out other underlying causes of anemia, kidney failure, etc.In 2014, the IMWG updated their criteria further to include biomarkers of malignancy.  These biomarkers are
to rule out other underlying causes of anemia, kidney failure, etc.In 2014, the IMWG updated their criteria further to include biomarkers of malignancy.  These biomarkers are >60% clonal plasma cells, a serum involved / uninvolved free light chain ratio ≥ 100 (the
marrow biopsy andNo myeloma-related organ or tissue impairment or a related B-cell lymphoproliferative disorderRelated conditions include solitary plasmacytoma (a single tumor of plasma cells, typically treated with irradiation), plasma cell dyscrasia (where only the antibodies produce symptoms, e.g., AL amyloidosis),
usually deferred or restricted to clinical trials. Treatment for multiple myeloma is focused on decreasing the clonal plasma cell population and consequently decrease the symptoms of disease. Initial Initial treatment of multiple myeloma depends on the person's age and other illnesses present.The preferred treatment for those under the
is focused on decreasing the clonal plasma cell population and consequently decrease the symptoms of disease. Initial Initial treatment of multiple myeloma depends on the person's age and other illnesses present.The preferred treatment for those under the age of 65 is high-dose chemotherapy, commonly with bortezomib-
focused on decreasing the clonal plasma cell population and consequently decrease the symptoms of disease. Initial Initial treatment of multiple myeloma depends on the person's age and other illnesses present.The preferred treatment for those under the age of 65 is high-dose chemotherapy, commonly with bortezomib-
by a stem cell transplant. A 2016 study concluded that stem cell transplant is the preferred treatment of multiple myeloma. There are two types of stem cell transplants to treat multiple myeloma. In autologous hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation (ASCT) – the patient's own stem cells are
the patient's own stem cells are collected from the patient's own blood. The patient is given high-dose chemotherapy, and the patient's stem cells are then transplanted back into the patient. The process is not curative, but does prolong overall survival and complete remission. In
patient's own stem cells are collected from the patient's own blood. The patient is given high-dose chemotherapy, and the patient's stem cells are then transplanted back into the patient. The process is not curative, but does prolong overall survival and complete remission. In
. The process is not curative, but does prolong overall survival and complete remission. In allogeneic stem-cell transplantation, a healthy donor's stem cells are transplanted into the affected person. Allogenic stem-cell transplantation has the potential for a cure, but is used in a
transplanted into the affected person. Allogenic stem-cell transplantation has the potential for a cure, but is used in a very small percentage of people (and in the relapsed setting, not as part of initial treatment). Furthermore, a 5–10% treatment-associated mortality rate
People over age 65 and people with significant concurrent illnesses often cannot tolerate stem-cell transplantation.  For these people, the standard of care has been chemotherapy with melphalan and prednisone.  Recent studies among this population suggest improved outcomes with new chemotherapy regimens, e.g., with
. Head-to-head studies comparing these regimens have not been performed as of 2008.There is support for continuous therapies with multiple drug combinations of antimyeloma drugs bortezomib, lenalidomide and thalidomide as initial treatment for transplant-ineligible multiple myeloma. Further clinical studies are required to determine the potential
treatment for transplant-ineligible multiple myeloma. Further clinical studies are required to determine the potential harms of these drugs and the effect on the person's quality of life. A 2009 review noted, "Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are the major side effects ofthalidomide and lenalidomide. Lenalidomide
for transplant-ineligible multiple myeloma. Further clinical studies are required to determine the potential harms of these drugs and the effect on the person's quality of life. A 2009 review noted, "Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are the major side effects ofthalidomide and lenalidomide. Lenalidomide
-ineligible multiple myeloma. Further clinical studies are required to determine the potential harms of these drugs and the effect on the person's quality of life. A 2009 review noted, "Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are the major side effects ofthalidomide and lenalidomide. Lenalidomide causes more
ofthalidomide and lenalidomide. Lenalidomide causes more myelosuppression, and thalidomide causes more sedation. Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy and thrombocytopenia are major side effects of bortezomib."Treatment of related hyperviscosity syndrome may be required to prevent neurologic symptoms or kidney failure. Maintenance Most people, including those treated with
2012 clinical trial showed that people with intermediate- and high-risk disease benefit from a bortezomib-based maintenance regimen. Relapse The natural history of myeloma is of relapse following treatment. This may be attributed to tumor heterogeneity.  Depending on the person's condition, the prior treatment
regimen. Relapse The natural history of myeloma is of relapse following treatment. This may be attributed to tumor heterogeneity.  Depending on the person's condition, the prior treatment modalities used and the duration of remission, options for relapsed disease include retreatment with the original agent, use of
. Relapse The natural history of myeloma is of relapse following treatment. This may be attributed to tumor heterogeneity.  Depending on the person's condition, the prior treatment modalities used and the duration of remission, options for relapsed disease include retreatment with the original agent, use of
treatment. This may be attributed to tumor heterogeneity.  Depending on the person's condition, the prior treatment modalities used and the duration of remission, options for relapsed disease include retreatment with the original agent, use of other agents (such as melphalan, cyclophosphamide, thalidomide,
Acute kidney failure typically resolves when the calcium and paraprotein levels are brought under control. Treatment of chronic kidney failure is dependent on the type of kidney failure and may involve dialysis.Several newer options are approved for the management of advanced disease:belantamab mafodotin — a monoclonal antibody against
:belantamab mafodotin — a monoclonal antibody against B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA), also known as CD269, indicated for the treatment of adults with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma who have received at least four prior therapies including an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody, a proteasome inhibitor
, and an immunomodulatory agent.carfilzomib — a proteasome inhibitor that is indicated:as a single agent in people who have received one or more lines of therapyin combination with dexamethasone or with lenalidomide and dexamethasone in people who have received one to three lines of therapydaratumumab — a monoclonal antibody against CD38
who have received one or more lines of therapyin combination with dexamethasone or with lenalidomide and dexamethasone in people who have received one to three lines of therapydaratumumab — a monoclonal antibody against CD38 indicated in people who have received at least three prior lines of therapy including a proteasome inhibitor and an
who have received one to three lines of therapydaratumumab — a monoclonal antibody against CD38 indicated in people who have received at least three prior lines of therapy including a proteasome inhibitor and an immunomodulatory agent or who are double refractory to a proteasome inhibitor and an immunomodulatory agentelotuzumab — an immunostimulatory humanized
in people who have received one to three prior therapiesisatuximab - a monoclonal antibody against CD38 indicated in combination with pomalidomide and dexamethasone for the treatment of adults with multiple myeloma who have received at least two prior therapies including lenalidomide and a proteasome inhibitor.ixazomib — an orally available proteasome inhibitor indicated in
direct antitumor effect even in people without known skeletal disease.  If needed, red blood cell transfusions or erythropoietin can be used for management of anemia.Chemotherapies and stem cell transplants can cause unwanted bleedings and may require platelet transfusions. It was seen that platelet transfusions for people undergoing
bleedings and may require platelet transfusions. It was seen that platelet transfusions for people undergoing a chemotherapy or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the
seen that platelet transfusions for people undergoing a chemotherapy or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet
or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet transfusions depending of the way they were used (
number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet transfusions depending of the way they were used (therapeutic, depending on a threshold, different dose schedules or prophylactic).Adding physical exercises to the
the standard treatment for adult patients with haematological malignancies like multiple myeloma may result in little to no difference in the mortality, in the quality of life and in the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression. Furthermore, aerobic physical exercises probably reduce fatigue
uncertain about the effect and serious adverse events Multiple national cancer treatment guidelines recommend early palliative care for people with advanced multiple myeloma at the time of diagnosis and for anyone who has significant symptoms.Palliative care is appropriate at any stage of multiple myeloma and can be provided alongside curative treatment
symptoms.Palliative care is appropriate at any stage of multiple myeloma and can be provided alongside curative treatment.  In addition to addressing symptoms of cancer, palliative care helps manage unwanted side effects, such as pain and nausea related to treatments.Oral prophylaxis, hygiene instruction and elimination
cancer, palliative care helps manage unwanted side effects, such as pain and nausea related to treatments.Oral prophylaxis, hygiene instruction and elimination of sources of infection within the mouth before beginning cancer treatment, can reduce the risk of infectious complications. Before starting bisphosphonates therapy, the person
palliative care helps manage unwanted side effects, such as pain and nausea related to treatments.Oral prophylaxis, hygiene instruction and elimination of sources of infection within the mouth before beginning cancer treatment, can reduce the risk of infectious complications. Before starting bisphosphonates therapy, the person's dental
of infectious complications. Before starting bisphosphonates therapy, the person's dental health should be evaluated to assess the risk factors to prevent the development of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ). If there are any symptoms or radiographic appearance of MRONJ like jaw pain, loose
pain, loose tooth, mucosal swelling, early referral to an oral surgeon is recommended. Dental extractions should be avoided during the active period of treatment and treat the tooth with nonsurgical root canal treatment instead.Overall the 5-year survival rate is around 54% in the United
estimated 30,330 new cases and 12,650 deaths were reported. These numbers are based on assumptions made using data from 2011, which estimated the number of people affected as 83,367 people, the number of new cases as 6.1 per 100,000 people per year, and the mortality as 3.4 per 100,000
number of new cases of this disease in the United States and Asians the lowest. Results of one study found the number of new cases of myeloma to be 9.5 cases per 100,000 African Americans and 4.1 cases per 100,000 Caucasian Americans. Among African Americans, myeloma is one of the
be 9.5 cases per 100,000 African Americans and 4.1 cases per 100,000 Caucasian Americans. Among African Americans, myeloma is one of the top-10 causes of cancer death.Myeloma is the 17th-most common cancer in the UK: around 4,800 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011.
most common cancer in the UK: around 4,800 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011. It is the 16th-most common cause of cancer death: around 2,700 people died of it in 2012.Multiple myeloma has been diagnosed in dogs, cats, and horses.In dogs,
, and plasma-protein studies. In dogs, protein studies usually reveal the monoclonal gammaglobulin elevation to be IgA or IgG in equal number of cases. In rare cases the globulin elevation is IgM, which is referred to as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. The prognosis for initial control and
cases the globulin elevation is IgM, which is referred to as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. The prognosis for initial control and return to good quality of life in dogs is good;  43% of dogs started on a combination chemotherapeutic protocol achieved complete remission.  Long-term survival
to as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. The prognosis for initial control and return to good quality of life in dogs is good;  43% of dogs started on a combination chemotherapeutic protocol achieved complete remission.  Long-term survival is normal, with a median of 540 days reported
term survival is normal, with a median of 540 days reported. The disease eventually recurs, becoming resistant to available therapies. The complications of kidney failure, sepsis, or pain can lead to an animal's death, frequently by euthanasia.Multiple myeloma at Curlie
The disease eventually recurs, becoming resistant to available therapies. The complications of kidney failure, sepsis, or pain can lead to an animal's death, frequently by euthanasia.Multiple myeloma at Curlie

most children survive this cancer, they may lose their vision in the affected eye(s) or need to have the eye removed.Almost half of children with retinoblastoma have a hereditary genetic defect associated with retinoblastoma. In other cases, it is caused by a congenital mutation in the chromosome
. In other cases, it is caused by a congenital mutation in the chromosome 13 gene 13q14 (retinoblastoma protein).The most common and obvious sign of retinoblastoma is an abnormal appearance of the retina as viewed through the pupil, the medical term for which is leukocoria, also known as amaurotic
is an abnormal appearance of the retina as viewed through the pupil, the medical term for which is leukocoria, also known as amaurotic cat's eye reflex. Other signs and symptoms include deterioration of vision, a red and irritated eye with glaucoma, and faltering growth or delayed development
the pupil, the medical term for which is leukocoria, also known as amaurotic cat's eye reflex. Other signs and symptoms include deterioration of vision, a red and irritated eye with glaucoma, and faltering growth or delayed development. Some children with retinoblastoma can develop a squint,
A positive diagnosis is usually made only with an examination under anesthetic (EUA). A white eye reflection is not always a positive indication of retinoblastoma and can be caused by light being reflected badly or by other conditions such as Coats' disease.The presence of the photographic fault
as Coats' disease.The presence of the photographic fault red eye in only one eye and not in the other may be a sign of retinoblastoma. A clearer sign is "white eye" or "cat's eye" (leukocoria).Mutation of genes, found in chromosomes, can
only one eye and not in the other may be a sign of retinoblastoma. A clearer sign is "white eye" or "cat's eye" (leukocoria).Mutation of genes, found in chromosomes, can affect the way in which cells grow and develop within the body. Alterations
in the other may be a sign of retinoblastoma. A clearer sign is "white eye" or "cat's eye" (leukocoria).Mutation of genes, found in chromosomes, can affect the way in which cells grow and develop within the body. Alterations in RB1 or MYCN can
cells grow and develop within the body. Alterations in RB1 or MYCN can give rise to retinoblastoma.In children with the heritable genetic form of retinoblastoma, a mutation occurs in the RB1 gene on chromosome 13. RB1 was the first tumor suppressor gene cloned. Although RB1 interacts with
proteins, its negative regulator effect on the cell cycle principally arises from binding and inactivation of the transcription factor E2F, thus repressing the transcription of genes which are required for the S phase.The defective RB1 gene can be inherited from either parent; in some children, however,
mutation occurs in the early stages of fetal development. The expression of the RB1 allele is autosomal dominant with 90% penetrance.Inherited forms of retinoblastomas are more likely to be bilateral. In addition, inherited uni- or bilateral retinoblastomas may be associated with pineoblastoma and other malignant midline supratentorial
as trilateral retinoblastoma. A recent meta-analysis has shown that survival of trilateral retinoblastoma has increased substantially over the last decades.The development of retinoblastoma can be explained by the two-hit model. According to the two-hit model, both alleles need to be affected,
results in the loss of the remaining normal allele (gene) and occurs within a particular retinal cell. In the sporadic, nonheritable form of retinoblastoma, both mutational events occur within a single retinal cell after fertilization (somatic events); sporadic retinoblastoma tends to be unilateral.Several
are with RB1 inactivation. There are cases reported with only one RB1 mutation or even two functional RB1 alleles, which indicates other oncogenic lesions of retinoblastoma. Somatic amplification of the MYCN oncogene is responsible for some cases of nonhereditary, early-onset, aggressive, unilateral retinoblastoma. MYCN
of nonhereditary, early-onset, aggressive, unilateral retinoblastoma. MYCN can act as a transcription factor and promotes proliferation by regulating the expression of cell cycle genes. Although MYCN amplification accounted for only 1.4% of retinoblastoma cases, researchers identified it in 18% of infants diagnosed at
can act as a transcription factor and promotes proliferation by regulating the expression of cell cycle genes. Although MYCN amplification accounted for only 1.4% of retinoblastoma cases, researchers identified it in 18% of infants diagnosed at less than 6 months of age. Median age at diagnosis for MYCN
regulating the expression of cell cycle genes. Although MYCN amplification accounted for only 1.4% of retinoblastoma cases, researchers identified it in 18% of infants diagnosed at less than 6 months of age. Median age at diagnosis for MYCN retinoblastoma was 4.5 months, compared with 24 months for
Although MYCN amplification accounted for only 1.4% of retinoblastoma cases, researchers identified it in 18% of infants diagnosed at less than 6 months of age. Median age at diagnosis for MYCN retinoblastoma was 4.5 months, compared with 24 months for those who had nonfamilial unilateral disease with two
with two RB1 gene mutations.Screening for retinoblastoma should be part of a "well baby" screening for newborns during the first 3 months of life, to include:The red reflex: checking for a normal reddish-orange reflection from the eye's retina with an ophthalmoscope or
newborns during the first 3 months of life, to include:The red reflex: checking for a normal reddish-orange reflection from the eye's retina with an ophthalmoscope or retinoscope from about 30 cm or 1 foot, usually done in a dimly lit or dark roomThe corneal light reflex
during the first 3 months of life, to include:The red reflex: checking for a normal reddish-orange reflection from the eye's retina with an ophthalmoscope or retinoscope from about 30 cm or 1 foot, usually done in a dimly lit or dark roomThe corneal light reflex
30 cm or 1 foot, usually done in a dimly lit or dark roomThe corneal light reflex or Hirschberg test: checking for symmetrical reflection of beam of light in the same spot on each eye when a light is shined into each cornea, to help determine whether the eyes are
or 1 foot, usually done in a dimly lit or dark roomThe corneal light reflex or Hirschberg test: checking for symmetrical reflection of beam of light in the same spot on each eye when a light is shined into each cornea, to help determine whether the eyes are crossedEye examination
genome are required for their development, but this does not imply that they are heritable, or transmitted to offspring). Around 55% of children with retinoblastoma have the nonheritable form. If no history of the disease exists within the family, the disease is labeled "sporadic"
indicate that it is the nonheritable form. Bilateral retinoblastomas are commonly heritable, while unilateral retinoblastomas are commonly nonheritable.In about two-thirds of cases, only one eye is affected (unilateral retinoblastoma); in the other third, tumors develop in both eyes (bilateral retinoblastoma)
is affected (unilateral retinoblastoma); in the other third, tumors develop in both eyes (bilateral retinoblastoma). The number and size of tumors on each eye may vary. In certain cases, the pineal gland or the suprasellar or parasellar region (or in very rare cases
(or in very rare cases other midline intracranial locations) is also affected (trilateral retinoblastoma). The position, size, and quantity of tumors are considered when choosing the type of treatment for the disease.1. Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous is a congenital developmental anomaly of the eye resulting
intracranial locations) is also affected (trilateral retinoblastoma). The position, size, and quantity of tumors are considered when choosing the type of treatment for the disease.1. Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous is a congenital developmental anomaly of the eye resulting from failure of the embryological, primary vitreous
shorter, develops a cataract, and may present with whitening of the pupil.2. Coats disease is a typically unilateral disease characterised by abnormal development of blood vessels behind the retina, leading to blood vessel abnormalities in the retina and retinal detachment to mimic retinoblastoma.3. Toxocariasis is a parasitic disease
Toxocariasis is a parasitic disease of the eye associated with exposure to infected puppies, which causes a retinal lesion leading to retinal detachment.4. Retinopathy of prematurity is associated with low-birth-weight infants who receive supplemental oxygen in the period immediately after birth, and it involves damage to
tumor. Bone marrow examination or lumbar puncture may also be done to determine any metastases to bones or the brain.Gross and microscopic appearances of retinoblastoma are identical in both hereditary and sporadic types. Macroscopically, viable tumor cells are found near blood vessels, while zones of necrosis are
microscopic appearances of retinoblastoma are identical in both hereditary and sporadic types. Macroscopically, viable tumor cells are found near blood vessels, while zones of necrosis are found in relatively avascular areas. Microscopically, both undifferentiated and differentiated elements may be present. Undifferentiated elements appear as collections of small
-Wintersteiner rosettes, Homer Wright rosettes,  and fleurettes from photoreceptor differentiation.																		Identifying the RB1 gene mutation that led to a child's retinoblastoma can be important in the clinical care of  the affected individual and in the care of (future) siblings and offspring. It
children, and other relatives can be tested for the mutation; if they do not carry the mutation, child relatives are not at risk of retinoblastoma, so need not undergo the trauma and expense of examinations under anaesthetic.  For the 85% of unilaterally affected  patients found
; if they do not carry the mutation, child relatives are not at risk of retinoblastoma, so need not undergo the trauma and expense of examinations under anaesthetic.  For the 85% of unilaterally affected  patients found not to carry either of their eye tumor RB1 mutations  
unilaterally affected  patients found not to carry either of their eye tumor RB1 mutations  in blood, neither molecular  testing nor clinical surveillance of siblings is required.If  the  RB1 mutation of an affected individual is identified, amniotic cells in an at-risk pregnancy can
invasion. CT scan is generally avoided because radiation can stimulate the formation of more eye tumours in those with RB1 genetic mutation.The priority of retinoblastoma treatment is to preserve the life of the child, then to preserve vision, and then to minimize complications or side effects of treatment
priority of retinoblastoma treatment is to preserve the life of the child, then to preserve vision, and then to minimize complications or side effects of treatment. The exact course of treatment depends on the individual case and is decided by the ophthalmologist in discussion with the paediatric oncologist. Correct
preserve the life of the child, then to preserve vision, and then to minimize complications or side effects of treatment. The exact course of treatment depends on the individual case and is decided by the ophthalmologist in discussion with the paediatric oncologist. Correct treatment also depends on the mutation
– The most common indication for EBR is for the eye in a young child with bilateral retinoblastoma who has active or recurrent disease after completion of chemotherapy and local therapies. However, patients with hereditary disease who received EBR therapy are reported to have a 35% risk of second cancers
or more frequently, in patients with small tumors or in those who had failed initial therapy including previous EBR therapy.Thermotherapy involves the application of heat directly to the tumor, usually in the form of infrared radiation. It is also used for small tumors.Laser photocoagulation  is
may be used as primary therapy for small peripheral tumors or for small recurrent tumors previously treated with other methods.Systemic chemotherapy has become forefront of treatment in the past decade, in the search for globe-preserving measures and to avoid the adverse effects of EBR therapy. The common
the neck, directly into the optic vessels.Nanoparticulate chemotherapy – To reduce the adverse effects of systemic therapy, subconjuctival (local) injection of nanoparticle carriers containing chemotherapeutic agents (carboplatin) has been developed, which has shown promising results in the treatment of retinoblastoma in animal models without
subconjuctival (local) injection of nanoparticle carriers containing chemotherapeutic agents (carboplatin) has been developed, which has shown promising results in the treatment of retinoblastoma in animal models without adverse effects.Chemoreduction is a combined approach using chemotherapy to initially reduce the size of the tumor, and adjuvant
world, retinoblastoma has one of the best cure rates of all childhood cancers (95-98%), with more than 90% of sufferers surviving into adulthood. In the UK, around 40 to 50 new cases are diagnosed each year.Good prognosis depends upon early presentation
Survivors of hereditary retinoblastoma have a higher risk of developing other cancers later in life.Retinoblastoma presents with cumulative lifetime incidence rate of one case of retinoblastoma per 18000 to 30000 live births worldwide. A higher incidence is noted in developing countries, which has been attributed to lower socioeconomic status
countries, which has been attributed to lower socioeconomic status and the presence of human papilloma virus sequences in the retinoblastoma tissue.Almost 80% of children with retinoblastoma are diagnosed before three years of age and diagnosis in children above six years of age is extremely rare. In the UK
status and the presence of human papilloma virus sequences in the retinoblastoma tissue.Almost 80% of children with retinoblastoma are diagnosed before three years of age and diagnosis in children above six years of age is extremely rare. In the UK, bilateral cases usually present within 14 to 16
in the retinoblastoma tissue.Almost 80% of children with retinoblastoma are diagnosed before three years of age and diagnosis in children above six years of age is extremely rare. In the UK, bilateral cases usually present within 14 to 16 months, while diagnosis of unilateral cases peaks between

will need to be diagnosed by biopsy. Treatment may include, surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and targeted drug therapy. The other type of sarcoma is a bone sarcoma. There are many types. The World Health Organization lists more than fifty subtypes.An earlier version of this
who are exposed to chlorophenols in wood preservatives and phenoxy herbicides may have an increased risk of developing soft-tissue sarcomas. An unusual percentage of patients with a rare blood vessel tumor, angiosarcoma of the liver, have been exposed to vinyl chloride in their work. This substance is
. This substance is used in the manufacture of certain plastics, notably PVC.In the early 1900s, when scientists were just discovering the potential uses of radiation to treat disease, little was known about safe dosage levels and precise methods of delivery. At that time, radiation was used to
1900s, when scientists were just discovering the potential uses of radiation to treat disease, little was known about safe dosage levels and precise methods of delivery. At that time, radiation was used to treat a variety of noncancerous medical problems, including enlargement of the tonsils, adenoids,
a variety of noncancerous medical problems, including enlargement of the tonsils, adenoids, and thymus gland. Later, researchers found that high doses of radiation caused soft-tissue sarcomas in some patients. Because of this risk, radiation treatment for cancer is now planned to ensure that the
soft-tissue sarcomas in some patients. Because of this risk, radiation treatment for cancer is now planned to ensure that the maximum dosage of radiation is delivered to diseased tissue while surrounding healthy tissue is protected as much as possible.Kaposi's sarcoma, a rare cancer of the
. Kaposi's sarcoma, however, has different characteristics than typical soft-tissue sarcomas and is treated differently.In a very small fraction of cases, sarcoma may be related to a rare inherited genetic alteration of the p53 gene and is known as Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Certain
The only reliable way to determine whether a soft-tissue tumour is benign or malignant is through a biopsy. The two methods for acquisition of tumour tissue for cytopathological analysis are:Needle aspiration biopsy, via  needleSurgically, via an incision made into the tumourA pathologist examines the tissue
an incision made into the tumourA pathologist examines the tissue under a microscope. If cancer is present, the pathologist can usually determine the type of cancer and its grade. Here, 'grade' refers to a scale used to represent concisely the predicted growth rate of the tumour and
doxorubicin chemotherapy as an adjuvant can reduce recurrence at the original site or elsewhere in the body. Evidence also suggests chemotherapy can increase the length of time patients live, but this is less certain evidence. The use of chemotherapy to prevent the spread of soft-tissue sarcomas has not
in the body. Evidence also suggests chemotherapy can increase the length of time patients live, but this is less certain evidence. The use of chemotherapy to prevent the spread of soft-tissue sarcomas has not been proven to be effective. If the cancer has spread to other areas
docetaxel and gemcitabine could be an effective chemotherapy regimen in patients with advanced soft-tissue sarcoma.The research in soft tissue sarcoma requires lot of effort because of its rarity and needs immense collaboration. In year 2019, few notable researches have been presented but mostly failed. However,
pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma. In a report by Dr. Sameer Rastogi et al, a patient with advanced pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma had excellent response to combination of pembrolizumab and pazopanib.Soft-tissue sarcomas are relatively uncommon cancers. They account for less than 1% of all new cancer cases each
symptoms depending upon the location and size of the tumor. When symptoms do occur, they can include:blurred visiondouble vision (diplopia)irritationpaina perception of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of
upon the location and size of the tumor. When symptoms do occur, they can include:blurred visiondouble vision (diplopia)irritationpaina perception of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of vision (
occur, they can include:blurred visiondouble vision (diplopia)irritationpaina perception of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of vision (floaters)redness, bulging or displacement of the eye (proptosis),a change in
they can include:blurred visiondouble vision (diplopia)irritationpaina perception of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of vision (floaters)redness, bulging or displacement of the eye (proptosis),a change in the shape
of flashes of light in the eye (photopsia)a reduction in the total field of visionloss of visiona sensation of a foreign body in the field of vision (floaters)redness, bulging or displacement of the eye (proptosis),a change in the shape of the pupilpressure within the eyemetamorphopsia (a distortion of
of vision (floaters)redness, bulging or displacement of the eye (proptosis),a change in the shape of the pupilpressure within the eyemetamorphopsia (a distortion of vision where, when a person looks at a grid of straight lines, the lines appear wavy and parts of the grid appears blank).Uveal melanomas
Benign melanocytic tumors, such as iris freckles and moles (nevi), are common and pose no health risks, unless they show signs of malignancy, in which case they are classified as iris melanomas. Though derived from uveal melanocytes, iris melanomas share more in common with cutaneous
melanocytic tumors of the choroid, such as choroidal freckles and nevi, are very common and pose no health risks, unless they show signs of malignancy, in which case they are considered melanomas. Uveal melanoma is distinct from most skin melanomas associated with ultraviolet exposure; however, it
Because there are no lymphatic channels to the uveal tract, metastasis occurs through local extension and/or blood-borne dissemination. The most common site of metastasis for uveal melanoma is the liver; the liver is the first site of metastasis for 80%-90% of ocular melanoma patients. Other common
extension and/or blood-borne dissemination. The most common site of metastasis for uveal melanoma is the liver; the liver is the first site of metastasis for 80%-90% of ocular melanoma patients. Other common sites of metastasis include the lung, bones, and just beneath the skin (
for uveal melanoma is the liver; the liver is the first site of metastasis for 80%-90% of ocular melanoma patients. Other common sites of metastasis include the lung, bones, and just beneath the skin (subcutaneous). Approximately 50 percent of patients will develop metastases within 15
melanoma patients. Other common sites of metastasis include the lung, bones, and just beneath the skin (subcutaneous). Approximately 50 percent of patients will develop metastases within 15 years after treatment of the primary tumor, and the liver will be involved 90% of the time.
occur more than 10 years after treatment of the primary tumor, and patients should not be considered cured even after a 10-year interval of monitoring. Molecular features of the tumor, including chromosome 3 status, chromosome 6p status, and chromosome 8q status and gene expression profiling (
, and chromosome 8q status and gene expression profiling (such as the DecisionDx-UM test), can be used to adjust this likelihood of metastasis for an individual patient.The average survival time after diagnosis of liver metastases depends on the extent of systemic spread. The disease-
DecisionDx-UM test), can be used to adjust this likelihood of metastasis for an individual patient.The average survival time after diagnosis of liver metastases depends on the extent of systemic spread. The disease-free interval, the performance status, the liver substitution by metastases and
, this is now reserved for cases of extreme tumor burden or other secondary problems.  Advances in radiation therapies have significantly decreased the number of patients treated by enucleation in developed countries. The most common radiation treatment is plaque brachytherapy, in which a small disc-shaped shield (
outside surface of the eye, overlying the tumor. The plaque is left in place for a few days and then removed. The risk of metastasis after plaque radiotherapy is the same as that of enucleation, suggesting that micrometastatic spread occurs prior to treatment of the primary tumor.  
plaque radiotherapy is the same as that of enucleation, suggesting that micrometastatic spread occurs prior to treatment of the primary tumor.  Other modalities of treatment include transpupillary thermotherapy, external beam proton therapy, resection of the tumor, gamma knife stereotactic radiosurgery, or a combination of different modalities
the body, the five-year survival rate is about 15%.Several clinical and pathological prognostic factors have been identified that are associated with higher risk of metastasis of uveal melanomas. These include large tumor size, ciliary body involvement, presence of orange pigment overlying the tumor, and older patient
involvement, presence of orange pigment overlying the tumor, and older patient age. Likewise several histological and cytological factors are associated with higher risk of metastasis, including presence and extent of cells with epithelioid morphology, presence of looping extracellular matrix patterns, increased infiltration of immune cells, and
the tumor, and older patient age. Likewise several histological and cytological factors are associated with higher risk of metastasis, including presence and extent of cells with epithelioid morphology, presence of looping extracellular matrix patterns, increased infiltration of immune cells, and staining with several immunohistochemical markers.The
poor prognosis in uveal melanoma is inactivation of BAP1, which most often occurs through mutation of one allele and subsequent loss of an entire copy of chromosome 3 (monosomy 3) to unmask the mutant copy. Because of this function in inactivation of BAP1, monosomy 3 correlates strongly with
as isodisomy.  Thus, isodisomy 3 is prognostically equivalent to monosomy 3, and both can be detected by tests for chromosome 3 loss of heterozygosity. Monosomy 3, along with other chromosomal gains, losses, amplifications, and LOH, can be detected in fresh or paraffin-
uveal melanomas.  This analysis has been used to identify two subclasses of uveal melanomas: class 1 tumors that have a very low risk of metastasis, and class 2 tumors that have a very high risk of metastasis. Gene expression profiling outperforms all of the above-mentioned factors
of uveal melanomas: class 1 tumors that have a very low risk of metastasis, and class 2 tumors that have a very high risk of metastasis. Gene expression profiling outperforms all of the above-mentioned factors at predicting metastatic spread of the primary tumor, including monosomy 3.Currently,
the above-mentioned factors at predicting metastatic spread of the primary tumor, including monosomy 3.Currently, there is no consensus regarding type or frequency of scans following diagnosis and treatment of the primary eye tumor. Of the 50% of patients who develop metastatic disease, more than 90%
3.Currently, there is no consensus regarding type or frequency of scans following diagnosis and treatment of the primary eye tumor. Of the 50% of patients who develop metastatic disease, more than 90% of patients will develop liver metastases. As such, the majority of surveillance techniques are
scans following diagnosis and treatment of the primary eye tumor. Of the 50% of patients who develop metastatic disease, more than 90% of patients will develop liver metastases. As such, the majority of surveillance techniques are focused on the liver. These include abdominal magnetic resonance imaging
the 50% of patients who develop metastatic disease, more than 90% of patients will develop liver metastases. As such, the majority of surveillance techniques are focused on the liver. These include abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), abdominal ultrasound and liver function tests. The
.Some ophthalmologists have also found promise with the use of intravitreal avastin injections in patients suffering from radiation-induced retinopathy, a side effect of plaque brachytherapy treatment, as well as imaging surveillance with SD-OCT.Uveal melanomas are the most common primary intraocular tumor in adults.  Uveal
5.1 cases per million people per year. The incidence has remained stable for several years.In 2018, it was reported that two clusters of cases have been identified in Huntersville, NC and Auburn, AL. Cases involved alumni of Auburn University who were acquainted with each other.

so do not become healthy blood cells. Early on, no symptoms typically are seen. Later, symptoms may include feeling tired, shortness of breath, bleeding disorders, anemia, or frequent infections. Some types may develop into acute myeloid leukemia.Risk factors include previous chemotherapy or
a donor.About seven per 100,000 people are affected with about four per 100,000 people newly acquiring the condition each year. The typical age of onset is 70 years. The outlook depends on the type of cells affected, the number of blasts in the bone marrow or blood,
four per 100,000 people newly acquiring the condition each year. The typical age of onset is 70 years. The outlook depends on the type of cells affected, the number of blasts in the bone marrow or blood, and the changes present in the chromosomes of the affected cells.
the condition each year. The typical age of onset is 70 years. The outlook depends on the type of cells affected, the number of blasts in the bone marrow or blood, and the changes present in the chromosomes of the affected cells. The typical survival time following diagnosis
and symptoms are nonspecific and generally related to the blood cytopenias:Anemia (low RBC count or reduced hemoglobin) – chronic tiredness, shortness of breath, chilled sensation, sometimes chest painNeutropenia (low neutrophil count) – increased susceptibility to infectionThrombocytopenia (low platelet count) – increased susceptibility
abnormal nuclear shape and sizeChromosome abnormality, including chromosomal translocations and abnormal chromosome numberAlthough some risk exists for developing acute myelogenous leukemia, about 50% of deaths occur as a result of bleeding or infection. However, leukemia that occurs as a result of myelodysplasia is notoriously resistant to treatment.
, including chromosomal translocations and abnormal chromosome numberAlthough some risk exists for developing acute myelogenous leukemia, about 50% of deaths occur as a result of bleeding or infection. However, leukemia that occurs as a result of myelodysplasia is notoriously resistant to treatment.  Anemia dominates the early course
acute myelogenous leukemia, about 50% of deaths occur as a result of bleeding or infection. However, leukemia that occurs as a result of myelodysplasia is notoriously resistant to treatment.  Anemia dominates the early course. Most symptomatic patients complain of the gradual onset of fatigue and weakness
as a result of myelodysplasia is notoriously resistant to treatment.  Anemia dominates the early course. Most symptomatic patients complain of the gradual onset of fatigue and weakness, dyspnea, and pallor, but at least half the patients are asymptomatic and their MDS is discovered only incidentally on routine
in the person's medical history. Fever and weight loss should point to a myeloproliferative rather than myelodysplastic process.Some people have a history of exposure to chemotherapy (especially alkylating agents such as melphalan, cyclophosphamide, busulfan, and chlorambucil) or radiation (therapeutic or accidental),
as melphalan, cyclophosphamide, busulfan, and chlorambucil) or radiation (therapeutic or accidental), or both (e.g., at the time of stem cell transplantation for another disease). Workers in some industries with heavy exposure to hydrocarbons such as the petroleum industry have a slightly higher
of MDS can be difficult, but the presence of genetic abnormalities may provide some supportive information. Secondary MDS can occur as a late toxicity of cancer therapy (therapy associated MDS, t-MDS). MDS after exposure to radiation or alkylating agents such as busulfan, nitrosourea,
after exposure to radiation or alkylating agents such as busulfan, nitrosourea, or procarbazine, typically occurs 3–7 years after exposure and frequently demonstrates loss of chromosome 5 or 7. MDS after exposure to DNA topoisomerase II inhibitors occurs after a shorter latency of only 1–3 years and can have a
to arise from mutations in the multipotent bone-marrow stem cell, but the specific defects responsible for these diseases remain poorly understood. Differentiation of blood precursor cells is impaired, and  a significant increase in levels of apoptotic cell death occurs in bone-marrow cells. Clonal expansion
a significant increase in levels of apoptotic cell death occurs in bone-marrow cells. Clonal expansion of the abnormal cells results in the production of cells that have lost the ability to differentiate. If the overall percentage of bone-marrow myeloblasts rises over a particular cutoff (20%
cells. Clonal expansion of the abnormal cells results in the production of cells that have lost the ability to differentiate. If the overall percentage of bone-marrow myeloblasts rises over a particular cutoff (20% for WHO and 30% for FAB), then transformation to acute myelogenous
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) is said to have occurred. The progression of MDS to AML is a good example of the multistep theory of carcinogenesis in which a series of mutations occurs in an initially normal cell and transforms it into a cancer cell.While recognition of leukemic transformation
is said to have occurred. The progression of MDS to AML is a good example of the multistep theory of carcinogenesis in which a series of mutations occurs in an initially normal cell and transforms it into a cancer cell.While recognition of leukemic transformation was historically important (see History
but rather from the cytopenias seen in all MDS patients. While anemia is the most common cytopenia in MDS patients, given the ready availability of blood transfusion, MDS patients rarely suffer injury from severe anemia.  The two most serious complications in MDS patients resulting from their cytopenias are
rarely suffer injury from severe anemia.  The two most serious complications in MDS patients resulting from their cytopenias are bleeding (due to lack of platelets) or infection (due to lack of white blood cells).  Long-term transfusion of packed red blood cells leads to
lenalidomide) commercially available medications approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration  to treat MDS. Proper DNA methylation is critical in the regulation of proliferation genes, and the loss of DNA methylation control can lead to uncontrolled cell growth and cytopenias.  The recently approved DNA methyltransferase inhibitors
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration  to treat MDS. Proper DNA methylation is critical in the regulation of proliferation genes, and the loss of DNA methylation control can lead to uncontrolled cell growth and cytopenias.  The recently approved DNA methyltransferase inhibitors take advantage of this mechanism by creating
and retarding the progression of MDS to acute leukemia.Some authors have proposed that the loss of mitochondrial function over time leads to the accumulation of DNA mutations in hematopoietic stem cells, and this accounts for the increased incidence of MDS in older patients.  Researchers point to the accumulation
accumulation of mitochondrial iron deposits in the ringed sideroblast as evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction in MDS.Since at least 1974, the deletion in the long arm of chromosome 5 has been known to be associated with dysplastic abnormalities of hematopoietic stem cells.  By 2005, lenalidomide, a chemotherapy drug,
inducing better differentiation of healthy erythroid cells, as seen in patients without 5q deletion.Mutations in splicing factors have been found in 40–80% of cases with myelodysplastic syndrome, particularly in those with ringed sideroblasts.Mutations in the genes encoding for isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1 and
in those with ringed sideroblasts.Mutations in the genes encoding for isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1 and IDH2) occur in 10–20% of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome, and confer a worsened prognosis in low-risk MDS. Because the incidence of IDH1/2 mutations increases as the disease
IDH2) occur in 10–20% of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome, and confer a worsened prognosis in low-risk MDS. Because the incidence of IDH1/2 mutations increases as the disease malignancy increases, these findings together suggest that IDH1/2 mutations are important drivers of progression of MDS to a more
risk MDS. Because the incidence of IDH1/2 mutations increases as the disease malignancy increases, these findings together suggest that IDH1/2 mutations are important drivers of progression of MDS to a more malignant disease state.GATA2 deficiency is a group of disorders caused by a defect, familial, or sporadic
these findings together suggest that IDH1/2 mutations are important drivers of progression of MDS to a more malignant disease state.GATA2 deficiency is a group of disorders caused by a defect, familial, or sporadic inactivating mutations, in one of the two GATA2 genes. These autosomal dominant mutations cause
sporadic inactivating mutations, in one of the two GATA2 genes. These autosomal dominant mutations cause a reduction, in the cellular levels of the gene's product, GATA2. The GATA2 protein is a transcription factor critical for the embryonic development, maintenance, and functionality of blood-forming,
inactivating mutations, in one of the two GATA2 genes. These autosomal dominant mutations cause a reduction, in the cellular levels of the gene's product, GATA2. The GATA2 protein is a transcription factor critical for the embryonic development, maintenance, and functionality of blood-forming,
levels of the gene's product, GATA2. The GATA2 protein is a transcription factor critical for the embryonic development, maintenance, and functionality of blood-forming, lymph-forming, and other tissue-forming stem cells. In consequence of these mutations,  cellular levels of
similar to those in Down syndrome, develops during pregnancy or shortly after birth, and resolves within 3 months, or in about 10% of cases, progresses to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.The elimination of other causes of cytopenias, along with a dysplastic bone marrow, is required to
, and resolves within 3 months, or in about 10% of cases, progresses to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.The elimination of other causes of cytopenias, along with a dysplastic bone marrow, is required to diagnose a myelodysplastic syndrome, so differentiating MDS from anemia, thrombocytopenia, and
syndrome, so differentiating MDS from anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia is important.A typical diagnostic investigation includes:Full blood count and examination of blood film: The blood film morphology can provide clues about hemolytic anemia, clumping of the platelets leading to spurious thrombocytopenia, or leukemia.
can provide clues about hemolytic anemia, clumping of the platelets leading to spurious thrombocytopenia, or leukemia.Blood tests to eliminate other common causes of cytopenias such as lupus, hepatitis, B12, folate, or other vitamin deficiencies, kidney failure or heart failure, HIV, hemolytic anemia
patients.Bone marrow examination by a hematopathologist: This is required to establish the diagnosis, since all hematopathologists consider dysplastic marrow the key feature of myelodysplasia.Cytogenetics or chromosomal studies: This is ideally performed on the bone marrow aspirate. Conventional cytogenetics require a fresh specimen, since live
eosinophilic granules) within eosinophilsErythroid series:Binucleated erythroid precursors and karyorrhexisErythroid nuclear buddingErythroid nuclear strings or internuclear bridging (also seen in congenital dyserythropoietic anemias)Loss of e-cadherin in normoblasts is a sign of aberrancy.Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) (globular in vacuoles or diffuse cytoplasmic staining
precursors and karyorrhexisErythroid nuclear buddingErythroid nuclear strings or internuclear bridging (also seen in congenital dyserythropoietic anemias)Loss of e-cadherin in normoblasts is a sign of aberrancy.Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) (globular in vacuoles or diffuse cytoplasmic staining) within erythroid precursors in the bone marrow aspirate
(seen with interference contrast microscopy)Other stains can help in special cases (PAS and napthol ASD chloroacetate esterase positivity) in eosinophils is a marker of abnormality seen in chronic eosinophilic leukemia and is a sign of aberrancy.On the bone-marrow biopsy, high-grade dysplasia (RAEB
cases (PAS and napthol ASD chloroacetate esterase positivity) in eosinophils is a marker of abnormality seen in chronic eosinophilic leukemia and is a sign of aberrancy.On the bone-marrow biopsy, high-grade dysplasia (RAEB-I and RAEB-II) may show atypical localization
RA and RARS), where normoblasts are seen next to bony trabeculae instead of forming normal interstitially placed erythroid islands.Myelodysplasia is a diagnosis of exclusion and must be made after proper determination of iron stores, vitamin deficiencies, and nutrient deficiencies are ruled out. Also, congenital diseases
next to bony trabeculae instead of forming normal interstitially placed erythroid islands.Myelodysplasia is a diagnosis of exclusion and must be made after proper determination of iron stores, vitamin deficiencies, and nutrient deficiencies are ruled out. Also, congenital diseases such as congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (CDA I through
a pseudomyelodysplastic picture in one of the cell lines; however, all three cell lines are never morphologically dysplastic in these entities with the exception of chloramphenicol, arsenic toxicity, and other poisons.All of these conditions are characterized by abnormalities in the production of one or more of the
arsenic toxicity, and other poisons.All of these conditions are characterized by abnormalities in the production of one or more of the cellular components of blood (red cells, white cells other than lymphocytes, and platelets or their progenitor cells, megakaryocytes). French-American-British
and platelets or their progenitor cells, megakaryocytes). French-American-British (FAB) classification In 1974 and 1975, a group of pathologists from France, the US, and Britain produced the first widely used classification of these diseases. This French-American-British classification
). The worst outlook is with RAEB-T, where the mean life expectancy is less than 1 year. About one-quarter of patients develop overt leukemia. The others die of complications of low blood count or unrelated disease. The International Prognostic Scoring System is another tool
Scoring System is another tool for determining the prognosis of MDS, published in Blood in 1997.  This system takes into account the percentage of blasts in the marrow, cytogenetics, and number of cytopenias. World Health Organization In the late 1990s, a group of pathologists and clinicians
MDS, published in Blood in 1997.  This system takes into account the percentage of blasts in the marrow, cytogenetics, and number of cytopenias. World Health Organization In the late 1990s, a group of pathologists and clinicians working under the World Health Organization (WHO) modified
account the percentage of blasts in the marrow, cytogenetics, and number of cytopenias. World Health Organization In the late 1990s, a group of pathologists and clinicians working under the World Health Organization (WHO) modified this classification, introducing several new disease categories and eliminating others. Most
anemia should be made with caution.Patients with RA or RAEB occasionally present with leukocytosis or thrombocytosis instead of the usual cytopenia.The goals of therapy are to control symptoms, improve quality of life, improve overall survival, and decrease progression to AML.The IPSS scoring system can help triage
RA or RAEB occasionally present with leukocytosis or thrombocytosis instead of the usual cytopenia.The goals of therapy are to control symptoms, improve quality of life, improve overall survival, and decrease progression to AML.The IPSS scoring system can help triage patients for more aggressive treatment (i.e. bone marrow
help determine the best timing of this therapy.  Supportive care with blood products and hematopoietic growth factors (e.g. erythropoietin) is the mainstay of therapy. The regulatory environment for the use of erythropoietins is evolving, according to a recent US Medicare National coverage determination. However, no
 Supportive care with blood products and hematopoietic growth factors (e.g. erythropoietin) is the mainstay of therapy. The regulatory environment for the use of erythropoietins is evolving, according to a recent US Medicare National coverage determination. However, no comment on the use of hematopoietic growth factors for
requirement in patients with the chromosome 5q deletion subtype of MDSDecitabine/cedazuridine (Inqovi) is a fixed-dosed combination medication for the treatment of adults with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML).Chemotherapy with the hypomethylating agents 5-azacytidine and decitabine has been shown to
$9,200 per month. The chemotherapy may be supported by other drugs like all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), however the evidence of benefit is not clear.HLA-matched allogeneic stem cell transplantation, particularly in younger (i.e. less than 40 years of age) and
however the evidence of benefit is not clear.HLA-matched allogeneic stem cell transplantation, particularly in younger (i.e. less than 40 years of age) and more severely affected patients, offers the potential for curative therapy. Success of bone marrow transplantation has been found to correlate with
particularly in younger (i.e. less than 40 years of age) and more severely affected patients, offers the potential for curative therapy. Success of bone marrow transplantation has been found to correlate with severity of MDS as determined by the IPSS score, with patients having a more favorable IPSS
addition to the standard treatment for  adult patients with haematological malignancies may result in little to no difference in the mortality, in the quality of life and in the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression. Furthermore, aerobic physical exercises probably reduce fatigue
available in the US.Clinical trials in the MDS are ongoing with iron chelating agents to address the question of whether iron chelation alters the natural history of patients with MDS who are transfusion dependent. Reversal of some of the consequences of iron overload in MDS by iron chelation therapy have been shown
address the question of whether iron chelation alters the natural history of patients with MDS who are transfusion dependent. Reversal of some of the consequences of iron overload in MDS by iron chelation therapy have been shown.Both the MDS Foundation and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network MDS Guidelines Panel have
or liver failure occurred, some resulting in death. Due to this, patients should be closely monitored on deferasirox therapy prior to the start of therapy and regularly thereafter.The outlook in MDS is variable, with about 30% of patients progressing to refractory AML. The median survival
closely monitored on deferasirox therapy prior to the start of therapy and regularly thereafter.The outlook in MDS is variable, with about 30% of patients progressing to refractory AML. The median survival time varies from years to months, depending on type. Stem-cell transplantation offers possible
this disease. For example, in low-risk MDS, IDH1 and IDH2 mutations are associated with significantly worsened survival.The exact number of people with MDS is not known because it can go undiagnosed and no tracking of the syndrome is mandated. Some estimates are on the order
affected than females.Since the early 20th century, some people with acute myelogenous leukemia were begun to be recognized to have a preceding period of anemia and abnormal blood cell production.  These conditions were lumped together with other diseases under the term "refractory anemia".  The
facial skull is important because the bones are the attachment points for the facial muscles.Increased voice resonanceProviding a shockproof "buffer" in case of injuriesIsolation of sensitive structures (roots of teeth, eyeballs) from rapid temperature fluctuations in the nasal cavity during inhalation and exhalation.Humidification and
are the attachment points for the facial muscles.Increased voice resonanceProviding a shockproof "buffer" in case of injuriesIsolation of sensitive structures (roots of teeth, eyeballs) from rapid temperature fluctuations in the nasal cavity during inhalation and exhalation.Humidification and warming of the inhaled air, thanks
.Humidification and warming of the inhaled air, thanks to the slow air flow in the sinuses.Perform the function of a sensory system of air signals (a baroreceptor organ that responds to changes in environmental pressure).Paranasal sinuses form developmentally through excavation of bone by air-filled sacs (
Perform the function of a sensory system of air signals (a baroreceptor organ that responds to changes in environmental pressure).Paranasal sinuses form developmentally through excavation of bone by air-filled sacs (pneumatic diverticula) from the nasal cavity. This process begins prenatally (intrauterine life), and it
pneumatic diverticula) from the nasal cavity. This process begins prenatally (intrauterine life), and it continues through the course of an organism's lifetime.The results of experimental studies suggest that the natural ventilation rate of a sinus with a single sinus ostium (opening) is extremely
help prevent drying of its mucosal surface and maintain a near-sterile environment with high carbon dioxide concentrations and minimal pathogen access. Thus composition of gas content in the maxillary sinus is similar to venous blood, with high carbon dioxide and lower oxygen levels compared to breathing air.At
become blocked easily by allergic inflammation, or by swelling in the nasal lining that occurs with a cold. If this happens, normal drainage of mucus within the sinuses is disrupted, and sinusitis may occur. Because the maxillary posterior teeth are close to the maxillary sinus, this can
which are adenocarcinomas, which arises in the exocrine pancreas. Only 1 or 2% of clinically significant pancreas neoplasms are PanNETs.The majority of PanNETs are benign, while some are malignant. The World Health Organization (WHO) classification scheme places neuroendocrine tumors into three main categories,
effects of a larger PanNET tumor, either locally or at a metastasis. About 40% of PanNETS have symptoms related to  excessive secretion of hormones or active polypeptides and are accordingly labeled as "functional"; the symptoms reflect the type of hormone secreted, as discussed below.
have symptoms related to  excessive secretion of hormones or active polypeptides and are accordingly labeled as "functional"; the symptoms reflect the type of hormone secreted, as discussed below. Up to 60% of PanNETs are nonsecretory or nonfunctional, in which there is no secretion, or
discussed below. Up to 60% of PanNETs are nonsecretory or nonfunctional, in which there is no secretion, or the quantity or type of products, such as pancreatic polypeptide (PPoma), chromogranin A, and neurotensin, do not cause a clinical syndrome although blood levels may
example:gastrinoma: the excessive gastrin causes Zollinger–Ellison syndrome (ZES) with peptic ulcers and diarrheainsulinoma: hypoglycemia occurs with concurrent elevations of insulin, proinsulin and C peptideglucagonoma: the symptoms are not all due to glucagon elevations, and include a rash, sore mouth, altered
ACTHoma, CRHoma, calcitoninoma, GHRHoma, GRFoma, and parathyroid hormone–related peptide tumorIn these various types of functional tumors, the frequency of malignancy and the survival prognosis have been estimated dissimilarly, but a pertinent accessible summary is available.Because symptoms are non-specific, diagnosis
have been estimated dissimilarly, but a pertinent accessible summary is available.Because symptoms are non-specific, diagnosis is often delayed.Measurement of hormones including pancreatic polypeptide, gastrin, proinsulin, insulin, glucagon, and vasoactive intestinal peptide can determine if a tumor is causing hypersecretion.
glucagon, and vasoactive intestinal peptide can determine if a tumor is causing hypersecretion.Multiphase CT and MRI are the primary modalities for morphologic imaging of PNETs. While MRI is superior to CT for imaging, both of the primary tumor and evaluation of metastases, CT is more readily available
are the primary modalities for morphologic imaging of PNETs. While MRI is superior to CT for imaging, both of the primary tumor and evaluation of metastases, CT is more readily available. Notably, while many malignant lesions are hypodense in contrast-enhanced studies, the liver metastases of
of metastases, CT is more readily available. Notably, while many malignant lesions are hypodense in contrast-enhanced studies, the liver metastases of PNETs are hypervascular and readily visualized in the late arterial phase of the post-contrast CT study. However, morphological imaging alone is not
On biopsy, immunohistochemistry is generally positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin. Genetic testing thereof typically shows altered MEN1 and DAXX/ATRX.The 2010 WHO classification of tumors of the digestive system grades all the neuroendocrine tumors into three categories, based on their degree of cellular differentiation (from well-differentiated
proposed by The European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society.Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor staging (AJCC)												In general, treatment for PanNET encompasses the same array of options as other neuroendocrine tumors, as discussed in that main article. However, there are some specific differences, which are discussed here.
ATRX and DAXX genes were found in about 40% of pancreatic NETs.  The proteins encoded by ATRX and DAXX participate in chromatin remodeling of telomeres;  these mutations are associated with a telomerase-independent maintenance mechanism termed ALT (alternative lengthening of telomeres) that results in abnormally
and DAXX participate in chromatin remodeling of telomeres;  these mutations are associated with a telomerase-independent maintenance mechanism termed ALT (alternative lengthening of telomeres) that results in abnormally long telomeric ends of chromosomes.ATRX/DAXX and MEN1 mutations were associated with a better prognosis.Pancreatic
these mutations are associated with a telomerase-independent maintenance mechanism termed ALT (alternative lengthening of telomeres) that results in abnormally long telomeric ends of chromosomes.ATRX/DAXX and MEN1 mutations were associated with a better prognosis.Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor at Curlie
, chronic kidney disease, and dementia.High blood pressure is classified as primary (essential) hypertension or secondary hypertension. About 90–95% of cases are primary, defined as high blood pressure due to nonspecific lifestyle and genetic factors. Lifestyle factors that increase the risk include excess salt
factors that increase the risk include excess salt in the diet, excess body weight, smoking, and alcohol use. The remaining 5–10% of cases are categorized as secondary high blood pressure, defined as high blood pressure due to an identifiable cause, such as chronic kidney disease,
pressure due to an identifiable cause, such as chronic kidney disease, narrowing of the kidney arteries, an endocrine disorder, or the use of birth control pills.Blood pressure is classified by two measurements, the systolic and diastolic pressures, which are the maximum and minimum pressures,
-hour period appears more accurate than office-based blood pressure measurement.Lifestyle changes and medications can lower blood pressure and decrease the risk of health complications. Lifestyle changes include weight loss, physical exercise, decreased salt intake, reducing alcohol intake, and a healthy diet. If
If lifestyle changes are not sufficient then blood pressure medications are used. Up to three medications taken concurrently can control blood pressure in 90% of people. The treatment of moderately high arterial blood pressure (defined as >160/100 mmHg) with medications is associated with an improved life expectancy
treatment of moderately high arterial blood pressure (defined as >160/100 mmHg) with medications is associated with an improved life expectancy. The effect of treatment of blood pressure between 130/80 mmHg and 160/100 mmHg is less clear, with some reviews finding benefit and others finding unclear benefit. High
moderately high arterial blood pressure (defined as >160/100 mmHg) with medications is associated with an improved life expectancy. The effect of treatment of blood pressure between 130/80 mmHg and 160/100 mmHg is less clear, with some reviews finding benefit and others finding unclear benefit. High blood pressure
, might be related to associated anxiety rather than the high blood pressure itself.On physical examination, hypertension may be associated with the presence of changes in the optic fundus seen by  ophthalmoscopy. The severity of the changes typical of hypertensive retinopathy is graded from I to IV;
hypertension due to an identifiable cause. For example, Cushing's syndrome frequently causes truncal obesity, glucose intolerance, moon face, a hump of fat behind the neck/shoulder (referred to as a buffalo hump), and purple abdominal stretch marks. Hyperthyroidism frequently causes weight loss
the lower extremities relative to the arms, or delayed or absent femoral arterial pulses. Pheochromocytoma may cause abrupt ("paroxysmal") episodes of hypertension accompanied by headache, palpitations, pale appearance, and excessive sweating.Severely elevated blood pressure (equal to or greater than a systolic
is referred to as a hypertensive crisis. Hypertensive crisis is categorized as either hypertensive urgency or hypertensive emergency, according to the absence or presence of end organ damage, respectively.In hypertensive urgency, there is no evidence of end organ damage resulting from the elevated blood pressure. In
urgency or hypertensive emergency, according to the absence or presence of end organ damage, respectively.In hypertensive urgency, there is no evidence of end organ damage resulting from the elevated blood pressure. In these cases, oral medications are used to lower the BP gradually over 24 to
stop ongoing organ damage, however, there is a lack of randomized controlled trial evidence for this approach.Hypertension occurs in approximately 8–10% of pregnancies. Two blood pressure measurements six hours apart of greater than 140/90 mm Hg are diagnostic of hypertension in pregnancy. High blood pressure in
classified as pre-existing hypertension, gestational hypertension, or pre-eclampsia.Pre-eclampsia is a serious condition of the second half of pregnancy and following delivery characterised by increased blood pressure and the presence of protein in the urine. It occurs in about 5% of pregnancies
eclampsia.Pre-eclampsia is a serious condition of the second half of pregnancy and following delivery characterised by increased blood pressure and the presence of protein in the urine. It occurs in about 5% of pregnancies and is responsible for approximately 16% of all maternal deaths globally.
half of pregnancy and following delivery characterised by increased blood pressure and the presence of protein in the urine. It occurs in about 5% of pregnancies and is responsible for approximately 16% of all maternal deaths globally. Pre-eclampsia also doubles the risk of death of the baby
in about 5% of pregnancies and is responsible for approximately 16% of all maternal deaths globally. Pre-eclampsia also doubles the risk of death of the baby around the time of birth. Usually there are no symptoms in pre-eclampsia and it is detected by routine screening
responsible for approximately 16% of all maternal deaths globally. Pre-eclampsia also doubles the risk of death of the baby around the time of birth. Usually there are no symptoms in pre-eclampsia and it is detected by routine screening. When symptoms of pre-eclampsia occur
baby around the time of birth. Usually there are no symptoms in pre-eclampsia and it is detected by routine screening. When symptoms of pre-eclampsia occur the most common are headache, visual disturbance (often "flashing lights"), vomiting, pain over the stomach
gestational hypertension is defined as new-onset hypertension during pregnancy without protein in the urine.Failure to thrive, seizures, irritability, lack of energy, and difficulty in breathing can be associated with hypertension in newborns and young infants. In older infants and children, hypertension can cause
headache, unexplained irritability, fatigue, failure to thrive, blurred vision, nosebleeds, and facial paralysis.Hypertension results from a complex interaction of genes and environmental factors. Numerous common genetic variants with small effects on blood pressure have been identified as well as some rare genetic variants with
in later life is significant. Several environmental factors influence blood pressure. High salt intake raises the blood pressure in salt sensitive individuals; lack of exercise, central obesity can play a role in individual cases. The possible roles of other factors such as caffeine consumption, and vitamin D
factors such as caffeine consumption, and vitamin D deficiency are less clear. Insulin resistance, which is common in obesity and is a component of syndrome X (or the metabolic syndrome), also contributes to hypertension.Events in early life, such as low birth weight, maternal
the metabolic syndrome), also contributes to hypertension.Events in early life, such as low birth weight, maternal smoking, and lack of breastfeeding may be risk factors for adult essential hypertension, although the mechanisms linking these exposures to adult hypertension remain unclear. An increased rate of
Periodontal disease is also associated with high blood pressure.Secondary hypertension results from an identifiable cause. Kidney disease is the most common secondary cause of hypertension. Hypertension can also be caused by endocrine conditions, such as Cushing's syndrome, hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, acromegaly, Conn's syndrome
, hyperparathyroidism, and pheochromocytoma. Other causes of secondary hypertension include obesity, sleep apnea, pregnancy, coarctation of the aorta, excessive eating of liquorice, excessive drinking of alcohol, certain prescription medicines, herbal remedies, and stimulants such as cocaine and methamphetamine. Arsenic exposure through drinking
. Other causes of secondary hypertension include obesity, sleep apnea, pregnancy, coarctation of the aorta, excessive eating of liquorice, excessive drinking of alcohol, certain prescription medicines, herbal remedies, and stimulants such as cocaine and methamphetamine. Arsenic exposure through drinking water has been shown to
increased peripheral resistance in established hypertension is mainly attributable to structural narrowing of small arteries and arterioles, although a reduction in the number or density of capillaries may also contribute.It is not clear whether or not vasoconstriction of arteriolar blood vessels plays a role in hypertension. Hypertension is also
at least two separate health care visits. The UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recommends ambulatory blood pressure monitoring to confirm the diagnosis of hypertension if a clinic blood pressure is 140/90 mmHg or higher.For an accurate diagnosis of hypertension to be made, it is essential for
recommends ambulatory blood pressure monitoring to confirm the diagnosis of hypertension if a clinic blood pressure is 140/90 mmHg or higher.For an accurate diagnosis of hypertension to be made, it is essential for proper blood pressure measurement technique to be used. Improper measurement of blood pressure is common and
.For an accurate diagnosis of hypertension to be made, it is essential for proper blood pressure measurement technique to be used. Improper measurement of blood pressure is common and can change the blood pressure reading by up to 10 mmHg, which can lead to misdiagnosis and misclassification of hypertension
measurement of blood pressure is common and can change the blood pressure reading by up to 10 mmHg, which can lead to misdiagnosis and misclassification of hypertension. Correct blood pressure measurement technique involves several steps. Proper blood pressure measurement requires the person whose blood pressure is being measured to sit
be deflated slowly (2-3 mmHg per second) while listening for the Korotkoff sounds. The bladder should be emptied before a person's blood pressure is measured since this can increase blood pressure by up to 15/10 mmHg. Multiple blood pressure readings (at least two) spaced
is believed to be due to calcification of the arteries resulting in abnormally high blood pressure readings with a blood pressure cuff while intra arterial measurements of blood pressure are normal. Orthostatic hypertension is when blood pressure increases upon standing.Once the diagnosis of hypertension has been made, healthcare providers
blood pressure cuff while intra arterial measurements of blood pressure are normal. Orthostatic hypertension is when blood pressure increases upon standing.Once the diagnosis of hypertension has been made, healthcare providers should attempt to identify the underlying cause based on risk factors and other symptoms, if present. Secondary
kidney disease. Primary or essential hypertension is more common in adolescents and adults and has multiple risk factors, including obesity and a family history of hypertension. Laboratory tests can also be performed to identify possible causes of secondary hypertension, and to determine whether hypertension has caused damage to the
eyes, and kidneys. Additional tests for diabetes and high cholesterol levels are usually performed because these conditions are additional risk factors for the development of heart disease and may require treatment.Initial assessment of the hypertensive people should include a complete history and physical examination. Serum creatinine is measured
treatment.Initial assessment of the hypertensive people should include a complete history and physical examination. Serum creatinine is measured to assess for the presence of kidney disease, which can be either the cause or the result of hypertension. Serum creatinine alone may overestimate glomerular filtration rate and recent guidelines
and physical examination. Serum creatinine is measured to assess for the presence of kidney disease, which can be either the cause or the result of hypertension. Serum creatinine alone may overestimate glomerular filtration rate and recent guidelines advocate the use of predictive equations such as the Modification of Diet in
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) formula to estimate glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). eGFR can also provide a baseline measurement of kidney function that can be used to monitor for side effects of certain anti-hypertensive drugs on kidney function. Additionally, testing of urine
measurement of kidney function that can be used to monitor for side effects of certain anti-hypertensive drugs on kidney function. Additionally, testing of urine samples for protein is used as a secondary indicator of kidney disease. Electrocardiogram (EKG/ECG) testing is done to check for
side effects of certain anti-hypertensive drugs on kidney function. Additionally, testing of urine samples for protein is used as a secondary indicator of kidney disease. Electrocardiogram (EKG/ECG) testing is done to check for evidence that the heart is under strain from high blood pressure
prior minor disturbance such as a silent heart attack. A chest X-ray or an echocardiogram may also be performed to look for signs of heart enlargement or damage to the heart.In people aged 18 years or older hypertension is defined as either a systolic or a diastolic blood
derived from 24-hour ambulatory or home monitoring. Recent international hypertension guidelines have also created categories below the hypertensive range to indicate a continuum of risk with higher blood pressures in the normal range. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Treatment
-hour ambulatory blood pressure average ≥130/80 mmHg (daytime average ≥135/85 mmHg or nighttime average BP ≥120/70 mmHg).Hypertension occurs in around 0.2 to 3% of newborns; however, blood pressure is not measured routinely in healthy newborns. Hypertension is more common in high risk newborns. A variety of
of newborns; however, blood pressure is not measured routinely in healthy newborns. Hypertension is more common in high risk newborns. A variety of factors, such as gestational age, postconceptional age and birth weight needs to be taken into account when deciding if a blood pressure is normal
deciding if a blood pressure is normal in a newborn.Hypertension defined as elevated blood pressure over several visits affects 1% to 5% of children and adolescents and is associated with long term risks of ill-health. Blood pressure rises with age in childhood and, in children
Hypertension defined as elevated blood pressure over several visits affects 1% to 5% of children and adolescents and is associated with long term risks of ill-health. Blood pressure rises with age in childhood and, in children, hypertension is defined as an average systolic or diastolic blood
the American Academy of Family Physicians supports the view of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force that the available evidence is insufficient to determine the balance of benefits and harms of screening for hypertension in children and adolescents who do not have symptoms.Much of the disease burden of high blood pressure
2004 British Hypertension Society guidelines proposed lifestyle changes consistent with those outlined by the US National High BP Education Program in 2002 for the primary prevention of hypertension:maintain normal body weight for adults (e.g. body mass index 20–25 kg/m2)reduce dietary sodium intake to <100 mmol/ day (
normal body weight for adults (e.g. body mass index 20–25 kg/m2)reduce dietary sodium intake to <100 mmol/ day (<6 g of sodium chloride or <2.4 g of sodium per day)engage in regular aerobic physical activity such as brisk walking (≥30 min per day, most
body mass index 20–25 kg/m2)reduce dietary sodium intake to <100 mmol/ day (<6 g of sodium chloride or <2.4 g of sodium per day)engage in regular aerobic physical activity such as brisk walking (≥30 min per day, most days of the week)limit alcohol consumption to
reduction in mortality and cardiovascular disease remains uncertain. Estimated sodium intake ≥6g/day and <3g/day are both associated with high risk of death or major cardiovascular disease, but the association between high sodium intake and adverse outcomes is only observed in people with hypertension. Consequently,
cardiovascular disease, but the association between high sodium intake and adverse outcomes is only observed in people with hypertension. Consequently, in the absence of results from randomized controlled trials, the wisdom of reducing levels of dietary salt intake below 3g/day has been questioned. ESC guidelines mention
with poor cardiovascular health status.According to one review published in 2003, reduction of the blood pressure by 5 mmHg can decrease the risk of stroke by 34%, of ischemic heart disease by 21%, and reduce the likelihood of dementia, heart failure, and mortality from
pressure by 5 mmHg can decrease the risk of stroke by 34%, of ischemic heart disease by 21%, and reduce the likelihood of dementia, heart failure, and mortality from cardiovascular disease.Various expert groups have produced guidelines regarding how low the blood pressure target should be
be applicable to other populations.Many expert groups recommend a slightly higher target of 150/90 mmHg for those over somewhere between 60 and 80 years of age. The JNC-8 and American College of Physicians recommend the target of 150/90 mmHg for those over 60 years of age, but some experts
between 60 and 80 years of age. The JNC-8 and American College of Physicians recommend the target of 150/90 mmHg for those over 60 years of age, but some experts within these groups disagree with this recommendation. Some expert groups have also recommended slightly lower targets in those with diabetes
, it recommends medications if the systolic blood pressure is >130 mmHg or if the diastolic BP is >80 mmHg.The first line of treatment for hypertension is lifestyle changes, including dietary changes, physical exercise, and weight loss. Though these have all been recommended in scientific
exercise, and weight loss. Though these have all been recommended in scientific advisories, a  Cochrane systematic review found no evidence for effects of weight loss diets on death, long-term complications or adverse events in persons with hypertension. The review did find a decrease in blood
blood pressure. Their potential effectiveness is similar to and at times exceeds a single medication. If hypertension is high enough to justify immediate use of medications, lifestyle changes are still recommended in conjunction with medication.Dietary changes shown to reduce blood pressure include diets with low sodium, the
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension), vegetarian diets, and green tea consumption.Increasing dietary potassium has a potential benefit for lowering the risk of hypertension. The 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (DGAC) stated that potassium is one of the shortfall nutrients which is under-consumed in
(such as ACE-inhibitors or ARBs) should not take potassium supplements or potassium-enriched salts due to the risk of high levels of potassium.Physical exercise regimens which are shown to reduce blood pressure include isometric resistance exercise, aerobic exercise, resistance exercise, and device-
Self-monitoring and appointment reminders might support the use of other strategies to improve blood pressure control, but need further evaluation.Several classes of medications, collectively referred to as antihypertensive medications, are available for treating hypertension.First-line medications for hypertension include thiazide-diuretics,
similar beneficial effects when used as first-line therapy for hypertension. However, a Cochrane review that included 13 trials found that the effects of beta-blockers are inferior to that of other antihypertensive medications in preventing cardiovascular disease.Resistant hypertension is defined as high blood pressure that remains
defined as high blood pressure that remains above a target level, in spite of being prescribed three or more antihypertensive drugs simultaneously with different mechanisms of action. Failing to take prescribed medications as directed is an important cause of resistant hypertension. Resistant hypertension may also result from chronically high activity
72.5% (women) in Poland. Rates in Africa were about 45% in 2016.In Europe hypertension occurs in about 30-45% of people as of 2013. In 1995 it was estimated that 43 million people (24% of the population) in the United States had
further to 32% (76 million US adults) by 2017. In 2017, with the change in definitions for hypertension, 46% of people in the United States are affected. African-American adults in the United States have among the highest rates of hypertension in the world
hypertension, 46% of people in the United States are affected. African-American adults in the United States have among the highest rates of hypertension in the world at 44%. It is also more common in Filipino Americans and less common in US whites and Mexican Americans.
particularly in pre-adolescents, is more often secondary to an underlying disorder than in adults. Kidney disease is the most common secondary cause of hypertension in children and adolescents. Nevertheless, primary or essential hypertension accounts for most cases.Hypertension is the most important preventable risk factor for
factor for cognitive impairment and dementia. Other complications include hypertensive retinopathy and hypertensive nephropathy.Modern understanding of the cardiovascular system began with the work of physician William Harvey (1578–1657), who described the circulation of blood in his book "De motu cordis". The English clergyman Stephen
and hypertensive nephropathy.Modern understanding of the cardiovascular system began with the work of physician William Harvey (1578–1657), who described the circulation of blood in his book "De motu cordis". The English clergyman Stephen Hales made the first published measurement of blood pressure in 1733.
, who described the circulation of blood in his book "De motu cordis". The English clergyman Stephen Hales made the first published measurement of blood pressure in 1733.  However, hypertension as a clinical entity came into its own with the invention of the cuff-based sphygmomanometer
ausculted with a stethoscope while the sphygmomanometer cuff is deflated. This permitted systolic and diastolic pressure to be measured.The symptoms similar to symptoms of patients with hypertensive crisis are discussed in medieval Persian medical texts in the chapter of "fullness disease". The symptoms include headache, heaviness
the body, prominent, distended and tense vessels, fullness of the pulse, distension of the skin, coloured and dense urine, loss of appetite, weak eyesight, impairment of thinking, yawning, drowsiness, vascular rupture, and hemorrhagic stroke. Fullness disease was presumed to be
tense vessels, fullness of the pulse, distension of the skin, coloured and dense urine, loss of appetite, weak eyesight, impairment of thinking, yawning, drowsiness, vascular rupture, and hemorrhagic stroke. Fullness disease was presumed to be due to an excessive amount of blood
impairment of thinking, yawning, drowsiness, vascular rupture, and hemorrhagic stroke. Fullness disease was presumed to be due to an excessive amount of blood within the blood vessels.Descriptions of hypertension as a disease came among others from Thomas Young in 1808 and especially Richard Bright in 1836
vascular rupture, and hemorrhagic stroke. Fullness disease was presumed to be due to an excessive amount of blood within the blood vessels.Descriptions of hypertension as a disease came among others from Thomas Young in 1808 and especially Richard Bright in 1836. The first report of elevated blood pressure
among others from Thomas Young in 1808 and especially Richard Bright in 1836. The first report of elevated blood pressure in a person without evidence of kidney disease was made by Frederick Akbar Mahomed (1849–1884).Historically the treatment for what was called the "hard pulse disease" consisted in reducing the
disease was made by Frederick Akbar Mahomed (1849–1884).Historically the treatment for what was called the "hard pulse disease" consisted in reducing the quantity of blood by bloodletting or the application of leeches. This was advocated by The Yellow Emperor of China, Cornelius Celsus, Galen, and Hippocrates
(1849–1884).Historically the treatment for what was called the "hard pulse disease" consisted in reducing the quantity of blood by bloodletting or the application of leeches. This was advocated by The Yellow Emperor of China, Cornelius Celsus, Galen, and Hippocrates.  The therapeutic approach for the
of hard pulse disease included changes in lifestyle (staying away from anger and sexual intercourse) and dietary program for patients (avoiding the consumption of wine, meat, and pastries, reducing the volume of food in a meal, maintaining a low-energy diet and the dietary usage
from anger and sexual intercourse) and dietary program for patients (avoiding the consumption of wine, meat, and pastries, reducing the volume of food in a meal, maintaining a low-energy diet and the dietary usage of spinach and vinegar).In the 19th and 20th centuries, before
wine, meat, and pastries, reducing the volume of food in a meal, maintaining a low-energy diet and the dietary usage of spinach and vinegar).In the 19th and 20th centuries, before effective pharmacological treatment for hypertension became possible, three treatment modalities were used, all with
modalities were used, all with numerous side-effects: strict sodium restriction (for example the rice diet), sympathectomy (surgical ablation of parts of the sympathetic nervous system), and pyrogen therapy (injection of substances that caused a fever, indirectly reducing blood pressure).The first chemical
(for example the rice diet), sympathectomy (surgical ablation of parts of the sympathetic nervous system), and pyrogen therapy (injection of substances that caused a fever, indirectly reducing blood pressure).The first chemical for hypertension, sodium thiocyanate, was used in 1900 but had many side
The American Heart Association estimated the direct and indirect costs of high blood pressure in 2010 as $76.6 billion. In the US 80% of people with hypertension are aware of their condition, 71% take some antihypertensive medication, but only 48% of people aware that they have
In the US 80% of people with hypertension are aware of their condition, 71% take some antihypertensive medication, but only 48% of people aware that they have hypertension adequately control it. Adequate management of hypertension can be hampered by inadequacies in the diagnosis, treatment, or
condition, 71% take some antihypertensive medication, but only 48% of people aware that they have hypertension adequately control it. Adequate management of hypertension can be hampered by inadequacies in the diagnosis, treatment, or control of high blood pressure. Health care providers face many obstacles to
medications to reach blood pressure goals. People also face the challenges of adhering to medicine schedules and making lifestyle changes. Nonetheless, the achievement of blood pressure goals is possible, and most importantly, lowering blood pressure significantly reduces the risk of death due to heart disease and stroke,
making lifestyle changes. Nonetheless, the achievement of blood pressure goals is possible, and most importantly, lowering blood pressure significantly reduces the risk of death due to heart disease and stroke, the development of other debilitating conditions, and the cost associated with advanced medical care.A 2015
vague symptoms. Symptoms become more noticeable as the cancer progresses. These symptoms may include bloating, pelvic pain, abdominal swelling, and loss of appetite, among others. Common areas to which the cancer may spread include the lining of the abdomen, lymph nodes, lungs, and
, fertility medication, and obesity. Factors that decrease risk include hormonal birth control, tubal ligation, and breast feeding. About 10% of cases are related to inherited genetic risk; women with mutations in the genes BRCA1 or BRCA2 have about a 50% chance of developing the
about a 50% chance of developing the disease. Ovarian carcinoma is the most common type of ovarian cancer, comprising more than 95% of cases. There are five main subtypes of ovarian carcinoma, of which high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) is the most common.
. Less common types of ovarian cancer include germ cell tumorsand sex cord stromal tumors. A diagnosis of ovarian cancer is confirmed through a biopsy of tissue, usually removed during surgery.Screening is not recommended in women who are at average risk, as evidence does not support a reduction
removed as a preventive measure. If caught and treated in an early stage, ovarian cancer is often curable. Treatment usually includes some combination of surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Outcomes depend on the extent of the disease, the subtype of cancer present, and other medical
. Treatment usually includes some combination of surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Outcomes depend on the extent of the disease, the subtype of cancer present, and other medical conditions. The overall five-year survival rate in the United States is 49%. Outcomes are worse
women and resulted in 161,100 deaths worldwide.  Among women it is the seventh-most common cancer and the eighth-most common cause of death from cancer. The typical age of diagnosis is 63. Death from ovarian cancer is more common in North America and Europe than in
 Among women it is the seventh-most common cancer and the eighth-most common cause of death from cancer. The typical age of diagnosis is 63. Death from ovarian cancer is more common in North America and Europe than in Africa and Asia.Early signs and symptoms
or pelvic pain or discomfort, back pain, irregular menstruation or postmenopausal vaginal bleeding, pain or bleeding after or during sexual intercourse, loss of appetite, fatigue, diarrhea, indigestion, heartburn, constipation, nausea, feeling full, and possibly urinary symptoms (including frequent urination and
mass.In adolescents or children with ovarian tumors, symptoms can include severe abdominal pain, irritation of the peritoneum, or bleeding. Symptoms of sex cord-stromal tumors produce hormones that can affect the development of secondary sex characteristics. Sex cord-stromal tumors in prepubertal children may
also common. Adolescents with sex cord-stromal tumors may experience amenorrhea. As the cancer becomes more advanced, it can cause an accumulation of fluid in the abdomen. If the malignancy has not been diagnosed by the time it causes ascites, it is typically diagnosed shortly thereafter.
shortly thereafter. Advanced cancers can also cause abdominal masses, lymph node masses, or pleural effusion.Ovarian cancer is related to the amount of time spent ovulating. Thus not having children is a risk factor for ovarian cancer, likely because ovulation is suppressed via pregnancy.  During
continue. Therefore, people who have not borne children are at twice the risk of ovarian cancer than those who have. A longer period of ovulation caused by early first menstruation and late menopause is also a risk factor. Both obesity and hormone replacement therapy also raise the risk.
hysterectomy (an operation in which the uterus, and sometimes the cervix, is removed). Age is also a risk factor.Use of fertility medication may contribute to ovarian borderline tumor formation, but the link between the two is disputed and difficult to study. Fertility drugs may
Postmenopausal HRT with combined estrogen and progesterone may increase contemporaneous risk if used for over 5 years, but this risk returns to normal after cessation of therapy. Estrogen HRT with or without progestins increases the risk of endometrioid and serous tumors but lowers the risk of mucinous tumors. Higher doses
therapy. Estrogen HRT with or without progestins increases the risk of endometrioid and serous tumors but lowers the risk of mucinous tumors. Higher doses of estrogen increase this risk. Endometriosis is another risk factor for ovarian cancer, as is pain with menstruation. Endometriosis is associated with clear-
grade serous tumors, stage I and II tumors, grade 1 tumors, and lower mortality.Before menopause, obesity can increase a person's risk of ovarian cancer, but this risk is not present after menopause. This risk is also relevant in those who are both obese and
be inherited through either the maternal or paternal line, but has variable penetrance. Though mutations in these genes are usually associated with increased risk of breast cancer, they also carry a substantial lifetime risk of ovarian cancer, a risk that peaks in a person's 40s and 50s.
associated with increased risk of breast cancer, they also carry a substantial lifetime risk of ovarian cancer, a risk that peaks in a person's 40s and 50s. The lowest risk cited is 30% and the highest 60%. Mutations in BRCA1 have a lifetime risk of developing
15 years before their sporadic counterparts because people who inherit the mutations on one copy of their gene only need one mutation to start the process of carcinogenesis, whereas people with two normal genes would need to acquire two mutations.In the United States, five of 100 women with a
with a first-degree relative with ovarian cancer will eventually get ovarian cancer themselves, placing those with affected family members at triple the risk of women with unaffected family members. Seven of 100 women with two or more relatives with ovarian cancer will eventually get ovarian cancer. In general
of a syndrome known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (also known as Lynch syndrome), which confers a higher risk for developing a number of cancers, including ovarian cancer. Lynch syndrome is caused by mutations in mismatch repair genes, including MSH2, MLH1, MLH6, PMS1,
.Alcohol consumption does not appear to be related to ovarian cancer. Other factors that have been investigated, such as smoking, low levels of vitamin D in the blood, presence of inclusion ovarian cysts, and infection with human papilloma virus (the cause of some cases of cervical
related to ovarian cancer. Other factors that have been investigated, such as smoking, low levels of vitamin D in the blood, presence of inclusion ovarian cysts, and infection with human papilloma virus (the cause of some cases of cervical cancer), have been disproven as risk
that use of perineal talc does increase the risk of ovarian cancer, but using talc more often does not create a greater risk. Use of talc elsewhere on the body is unrelated to ovarian cancer. Sitting regularly for prolonged periods is associated with higher mortality from epithelial ovarian cancer.
, but the connection is unclear. Diet seems to play a very small role, if any, in ovarian cancer risk. Higher levels of C-reactive protein are associated with a higher risk of developing ovarian cancer.Suppression of ovulation, which would otherwise cause damage to the
any, in ovarian cancer risk. Higher levels of C-reactive protein are associated with a higher risk of developing ovarian cancer.Suppression of ovulation, which would otherwise cause damage to the ovarian epithelium and, consequently, inflammation, is generally protective. This effect can be achieved
can be achieved by having children, taking combined oral contraceptives, and breast feeding, all of which are protective factors. A longer period of breastfeeding correlates with a larger decrease in the risk of ovarian cancer. Each birth decreases risk of ovarian cancer more, and this effect is
cancer by up to 50%, and the protective effect of combined oral contraceptives can last 25–30 years after they are discontinued. Regular use of aspirin or acetaminophen (paracetamol) may be associated with a lower risk of ovarian cancer; other NSAIDs do not seem to have a similar
(bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy) dramatically reduces the risk of not only ovarian cancer but breast cancer as well. This is still a topic of research, as the link between hysterectomy and lower ovarian cancer risk is controversial. The reasons that hysterectomy may be protective have not been elucidated
lower ovarian cancer risk is controversial. The reasons that hysterectomy may be protective have not been elucidated as of 2015.A diet that includes large amounts of carotene, fiber, and vitamins with low amounts of fat—specifically, a diet with non-starchy vegetables (e.g. broccoli and onions)—may
hysterectomy may be protective have not been elucidated as of 2015.A diet that includes large amounts of carotene, fiber, and vitamins with low amounts of fat—specifically, a diet with non-starchy vegetables (e.g. broccoli and onions)—may be protective, though research is still ongoing in this
e.g. broccoli and onions)—may be protective, though research is still ongoing in this area. Higher caffeine intake and consumption of more than two cups of tea a day have both been associated with lower ovarian cancer risk. Smoking tobacco is protective for sex cord-stromal tumors.Ovarian cancer
new cells form unneeded, and old or damaged cells do not die as they should. The buildup of extra cells often forms a mass of tissue called an ovarian tumor or growth. These abnormal cancer cells have many genetic abnormalities that cause them to grow excessively. When an ovary
genomic instability. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are essential for homologous recombination DNA repair, and germline mutations in these genes are found in about 15% of people with ovarian cancer. The most common mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the frameshift mutations that originated in a small founding population of Ashkenazi
pleural effusion, which can be noted on auscultation.When an ovarian malignancy is included in a list of diagnostic possibilities, a limited number of laboratory tests are indicated. A complete blood count and serum electrolyte test is usually obtained; when an ovarian cancer is present, these tests
A complete blood count and serum electrolyte test is usually obtained; when an ovarian cancer is present, these tests often show a high number of platelets (20–25% of people) and low blood sodium levels due to chemical signals secreted by the tumor. A positive test for inhibin
serum electrolyte test is usually obtained; when an ovarian cancer is present, these tests often show a high number of platelets (20–25% of people) and low blood sodium levels due to chemical signals secreted by the tumor. A positive test for inhibin A and inhibin B can
CA-125 above 35 U/mL in post-menopausal people. CA-125 levels are not accurate in early stage ovarian cancer, as fully half of stage I ovarian cancer patients have a normal CA-125 level. CA-125 may also be elevated in benign (non-cancerous) conditions, including
CA15-3, immunosuppressive acidic protein, haptoglobin-alpha, OVX1, mesothelin, lysophosphatidic acid, osteopontin, and fibroblast growth factor 23.Use of blood test panels may help in diagnosis. The OVA1 panel includes CA-125, beta-2 microglobulin, transferrin, apolipoprotein A1, and transthyretin. OVA1
A1, and transthyretin. OVA1 above 5.0 in premenopausal people and 4.4 in postmenopausal people indicates a high risk for cancer. A different set of laboratory tests is used for detecting sex cord-stromal tumors. High levels of testosterone or dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, combined with other symptoms and high
people indicates a high risk for cancer. A different set of laboratory tests is used for detecting sex cord-stromal tumors. High levels of testosterone or dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, combined with other symptoms and high levels of inhibin A and inhibin B can be indicative of an SCST of any
tests is used for detecting sex cord-stromal tumors. High levels of testosterone or dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, combined with other symptoms and high levels of inhibin A and inhibin B can be indicative of an SCST of any type.Current research is looking at ways to consider tumor marker proteomics
can be indicative of an SCST of any type.Current research is looking at ways to consider tumor marker proteomics in combination with other indicators of disease (i.e. radiology and/or symptoms) to improve diagnostic accuracy. The challenge in such an approach is that the disparate prevalence of ovarian cancer
. A physician suspecting ovarian cancer may also perform mammography or an endometrial biopsy (in the case of abnormal bleeding) to assess the possibility of breast malignancies and endometrial malignancy, respectively. Vaginal ultrasonography is often the first-line imaging study performed when an adnexal mass is found.
cancerous cells. If cancer is found, this procedure can also be used to determine the extent of its spread (which is a form of tumor staging). Risk scoring A widely recognized method of estimating the risk of malignant ovarian cancer is the risk of malignancy index (RMI
which is a form of tumor staging). Risk scoring A widely recognized method of estimating the risk of malignant ovarian cancer is the risk of malignancy index (RMI), calculated based on an initial workup. An RMI score of over 200 or 250 is generally felt to indicate
Simple Rules risk (SRrisk) calculation and Assessment of Different Neoplasias in the Adnexa (ADNEX) model that can be used to assess risk of malignancy in an adnexal mass, based on its characteristics and risk factors. The QCancer (Ovary) algorithm is used to predict likelihood of
cell ovarian cancer, and Brenner tumor (transitional cell carcinoma of the ovary). Epithelial ovarian cancers develop from the epithelium, a layer of cells that covers the ovary. Serous carcinoma Most people with epithelial ovarian carcinoma, about two-thirds, have a serous carcinoma, though
, whereas high-grade serous adenocarcinomas show anaplasia and nuclear atypia.50% of the time, serous carcinomas are bilateral, and in 85% of cases, they have spread beyond the ovary at the time of diagnosis. Most have a diameter over 15 cm.Serous Tubal Intraepithelial Carcinoma
% of the time, serous carcinomas are bilateral, and in 85% of cases, they have spread beyond the ovary at the time of diagnosis. Most have a diameter over 15 cm.Serous Tubal Intraepithelial Carcinoma (STIC) is now recognized to be the precursor lesion of
Small-cell ovarian carcinoma is rare and aggressive, with two main subtypes: hypercalcemic and pulmonary. It is typically fatal within 2 years of diagnosis. Hypercalcemic small cell ovarian carcinoma overwhelmingly affects those in their 20s, causes high blood calcium levels, and affects one ovary. Pulmonary
to endometriosis. They represent approximately 5% of all endometrial cancers. Japanese women develop clear-cell ovarian cancer more frequently than other groups of women. Clear-cell adenocarcinoma Clear-cell adenocarcinomas are histopathologically similar to other clear cell carcinomas, with clear cells and hobnail cells.
-Leydig cell tumor or arrhenoblastoma, accounts for 7% of ovarian cancers. They occur most frequently in women between 50 and 69 years of age but can occur in women of any age, including young girls. They are not typically aggressive and are usually unilateral; they are
sex-cord/stromal tumors present with distinct symptoms. Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors cause virilization and excessive hair growth due to the production of testosterone and androstenedione, which can also cause Cushing's syndrome in rare cases. Also, sex-cord stromal tumors occur that do not
diagnosed in women under 20. Granulosa cell tumor Granulosa cell tumors are the most common sex-cord stromal tumors, making up 70% of cases, and are divided into two histologic subtypes: adult granulosa cell tumors, which develop in women over 50, and juvenile granulosa tumors
, and juvenile granulosa tumors, which develop before puberty or before the age of 30. Both develop in the ovarian follicle from a population of cells that surrounds germinal cells. Adult granulosa cell tumor Adult granulosa cell tumors are characterized by later onset (30+ years, 50 on
cell tumor Adult granulosa cell tumors are characterized by later onset (30+ years, 50 on average). These tumors produce high levels of estrogen, which causes its characteristic symptoms: menometrorrhagia; endometrial hyperplasia; tender, enlarged breasts; postmenopausal bleeding; and secondary amenorrhea. The
sinus tumors, and choriocarcinomas, when they arise in the ovary. Some germ-cell tumors have an isochromosome 12, where one arm of chromosome 12 is deleted and replaced with a duplicate of the other. Most germ-cell cancers have a better prognosis than other subtypes and
, isosexual precocious puberty. They frequently metastasize to nearby lymph nodes, especially para-aortic and pelvic lymph nodes. The most common symptom of germ cell tumors is subacute abdominal pain caused by the tumor bleeding, necrotizing, or stretching the ovarian capsule. If the tumor ruptures,
less than 10% of those with germ-cell tumors. They can also secrete hormones which change the menstrual cycle. In 25% of germ-cell tumors, the cancer is discovered during a routine examination and does not cause symptoms.Diagnosing germ cell tumors may be difficult
ovarian cancer in young women and is the most likely germ cell tumor to metastasize to the lymph nodes; nodal metastases occur in 25–30% of cases. These tumors may have mutations in the KIT gene, a mutation known for its role in gastrointestinal stromal tumor. People with an
dysgerminoma is discovered to avoid the risk of another malignant tumor. Gonadoblastomas in people with Swyer or Turner syndrome become malignant in approximately 40% of cases. However, in general, dysgerminomas are bilateral 10–20% of the time.They are composed of cells that cannot differentiate further
are composed of cells that cannot differentiate further and develop directly from germ cells or from gonadoblastomas. Dysgerminomas contain syncytiotrophoblasts in approximately 5% of cases, and can therefore cause elevated hCG levels. On gross appearance, dysgerminomas are typically pink to tan-colored, have multiple lobes
having large, polyhedral, rounded clear cells. The nuclei are uniform and round or square with prominent nucleoli and the cytoplasm has high levels of glycogen. Inflammation is another prominent histologic feature of dysgerminomas. Choriocarcinoma Choriocarcinoma can occur as a primary ovarian tumor developing from a germ cell,
The nuclei are uniform and round or square with prominent nucleoli and the cytoplasm has high levels of glycogen. Inflammation is another prominent histologic feature of dysgerminomas. Choriocarcinoma Choriocarcinoma can occur as a primary ovarian tumor developing from a germ cell, though it is usually a gestational disease that metastasizes
gestational disease that metastasizes to the ovary. Primary ovarian choriocarcinoma has a poor prognosis and can occur without a pregnancy. They produce high levels of hCG and can cause early puberty in children or menometrorrhagia (irregular, heavy menstruation) after menarche. Immature (solid) teratoma Immature,
Immature (solid) teratoma Immature, or solid, teratomas are the most common type of ovarian germ cell tumor, making up 40–50% of cases. Teratomas are characterized by the presence of disorganized tissues arising from all three embryonic germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm;
tissues are not visible from the outside, which appears to be a solid mass with lobes and cysts. Histologically, they have large amounts of neuroectoderm organized into sheets and tubules along with glia; the amount of neural tissue determines the histologic grade. Immature teratomas usually only affect one
an immature teratoma.Stage I teratomas make up the majority (75%) of cases and have the best prognosis, with 98% of patients surviving 5 years; if a Stage I tumor is also grade 1, it can be treated with unilateral surgery only. Stage II
I tumor is also grade 1, it can be treated with unilateral surgery only. Stage II though IV tumors make up the remaining quarter of cases and have a worse prognosis,  with 73–88% of patients surviving 5 years. Mature teratoma (dermoid cyst) Mature teratomas,
unilateral surgery only. Stage II though IV tumors make up the remaining quarter of cases and have a worse prognosis,  with 73–88% of patients surviving 5 years. Mature teratoma (dermoid cyst) Mature teratomas, or dermoid cysts, are rare tumors consisting of mostly benign tissue
germ cell malignancies, and have the worst prognosis of all ovarian germ cell tumors. They occur both before menarche (in one-third of cases) and after menarche (the remaining two-thirds of cases). Half of the people with yolk sac tumors are diagnosed in
germ cell tumors. They occur both before menarche (in one-third of cases) and after menarche (the remaining two-thirds of cases). Half of the people with yolk sac tumors are diagnosed in stage I. Typically, they are unilateral until metastasis, which occurs
tumors) and a reticular pattern. Yolk sac tumors commonly secrete alpha-fetoprotein and can be immunohistochemically stained for its presence; the level of alpha-fetoprotein in the blood is a useful marker of recurrence. Embryonal carcinoma Embryonal carcinomas, a rare tumor type usually found in mixed
secrete alpha-fetoprotein and can be immunohistochemically stained for its presence; the level of alpha-fetoprotein in the blood is a useful marker of recurrence. Embryonal carcinoma Embryonal carcinomas, a rare tumor type usually found in mixed tumors, develop directly from germ cells but are not terminally
. They occur in younger people, with an average age at diagnosis of 14, and secrete both alpha-fetoprotein (in 75% of cases) and hCG.Histologically, embryonal carcinoma appears similar to the embryonic disc, made up of epithelial, anaplastic cells in disorganized sheets, with
up of epithelial, anaplastic cells in disorganized sheets, with gland-like spaces and papillary structures. Polyembryoma Polyembryomas, the most immature form of teratoma and very rare ovarian tumors, are histologically characterized by having several embryo-like bodies with structures resembling a germ disk, yolk sac
ovarian squamous cell carcinomas are rare and have a poor prognosis when advanced. More typically, ovarian squamous cell carcinomas are cervical metastases, areas of differentiation in an endometrioid tumor, or derived from a mature teratoma. Mixed tumors Mixed tumors contain elements of more than one of the above
in an endometrioid tumor, or derived from a mature teratoma. Mixed tumors Mixed tumors contain elements of more than one of the above classes of tumor histology. To be classed as a mixed tumor, the minor type must make up more than 10% of the tumor. Though
as a mixed tumor, the minor type must make up more than 10% of the tumor. Though mixed carcinomas can have any combination of cell types, mixed ovarian cancers are typically serous/endometrioid or clear cell/endometrioid. Mixed germ cell tumors make up approximately 25–30%
/endometrioid or clear cell/endometrioid. Mixed germ cell tumors make up approximately 25–30% of all germ cell ovarian cancers, with combinations of dysgerminoma, yolk sac tumor, and/or immature teratoma. The prognosis and treatment vary based on the component cell types. Secondary ovarian cancer Ovarian
The prognosis and treatment vary based on the component cell types. Secondary ovarian cancer Ovarian cancer can also be a secondary cancer, the result of metastasis from a primary cancer elsewhere in the body. About 7% of ovarian cancers are due to metastases, while the rest are primary
. They typically do not have extensive invasion; 10% of LMP tumors have areas of stromal microinvasion (<3mm, <5% of tumor). LMP tumors have other abnormal features, including increased mitosis, changes in cell size or nucleus size, abnormal nuclei, cell
cancers that appear confined to the ovary have metastasized microscopically, which is why even stage-I cancers must be staged completely. 22% of cancers presumed to be stage I are observed to have lymphatic metastases. The AJCC stage is the same as the FIGO stage. The AJCC
the same as the FIGO stage. The AJCC staging system describes the extent of the primary tumor (T), the absence or presence of metastasis to nearby lymph nodes (N), and the absence or presence of distant metastasis (M). The most common stage at
and the absence or presence of distant metastasis (M). The most common stage at diagnosis is stage IIIc, with over 70% of diagnoses. FIGO 						 AJCC/TNM The AJCC/TNM staging system indicates where the tumor has developed, spread to lymph nodes, and
cancer cells burst through the ovarian capsule and are able to move freely throughout the peritoneal cavity. Ovarian cancer metastases usually grow on the surface of organs rather than the inside; they are also common on the omentum and the peritoneal lining. Cancer cells can also travel through the lymphatic
not metastasize to the liver, lung, brain, or kidneys unless it is recurrent disease; this differentiates ovarian cancer from many other forms of cancer.There is no simple and reliable way to test for ovarian cancer in women who do not have any signs or symptoms. Screening
from screening. This high risk group has benefited with earlier detection.Ovarian cancer has low prevalence, even in the high-risk group of women from the ages of 50 to 60 (about one in 2000), and screening of women with average risk is more likely to
, even in the high-risk group of women from the ages of 50 to 60 (about one in 2000), and screening of women with average risk is more likely to give ambiguous results than detect a problem which requires treatment. Because ambiguous results are more likely than
is invasive interventions, in women of average risk, the potential harms of having screening without an indication outweigh the potential benefits. The purpose of screening is to diagnose ovarian cancer at an early stage, when it is more likely to be treated successfully.Screening with transvaginal ultrasound,
with strong genetic risk for ovarian cancer may consider the surgical removal of their ovaries as a preventive measure. This is often done after completion of childbearing years. This reduces the chances of developing both breast cancer (by around 50%) and ovarian cancer (by about 96%
regardless of the subtype of ovarian cancer. Surgical treatment may be sufficient for well-differentiated malignant tumors and confined to the ovary. Addition of chemotherapy may be required for more aggressive tumors confined to the ovary. For patients with advanced disease, a combination of surgical reduction with a
is not seen as useful. Second-look surgery and maintenance chemotherapy have not been shown to provide benefit.Surgery has been the standard of care for decades and may be necessary in obtaining a specimen for diagnosis.  The surgery depends upon the extent of nearby invasion of other
cancer when it is diagnosed. This extent of the cancer is described by assigning it a stage, the presumed type, and the grade of cancer. The gynecological surgeon may remove one (unilateral oophorectomy) or both ovaries (bilateral oophorectomy). The Fallopian tubes (salpingectomy)
particularly important with mucinous tumors. In children or adolescents with ovarian cancer, surgeons typically attempt to preserve one ovary to allow for the completion of puberty, but if the cancer has spread, this is not always possible. Dysgerminomas, in particular, tend to affect both ovaries:
but if the cancer has spread, this is not always possible. Dysgerminomas, in particular, tend to affect both ovaries: 8–15% of dysgerminomas are present in both ovaries. People with low-grade (well-differentiated) tumors are typically treated only with surgery, which
metastases in the peritoneum, stage- IV disease, cancer in the transverse fissure of the liver, mesentery, or diaphragm, and large areas of ascites. Debulking surgery is usually only done once. Computed tomography (abdominal CT) is often used to assess if primary debulking surgery is
may be useful as an addition for assessing macroscopic incomplete debulking. More complete debulking is associated with better outcomes: women with no macroscopic evidence of disease after debulking have a median survival of 39 months, as opposed to 17 months with less complete surgery. By removing metastases, many
opposed to 17 months with less complete surgery. By removing metastases, many cells that are resistant to chemotherapy are removed, and any clumps of cells that have died are also removed. This allows chemotherapy to better reach the remaining cancer cells, which are more likely to be fast
is finished after debulking. Though no definitive studies have been completed, it is shown to be approximately equivalent to primary debulking surgery in terms of survival, and shows slightly lower morbidity.There are several different surgical procedures that can be employed to treat ovarian cancer. For stage I
be removed, how much fluid has accumulated in the abdomen, and overall health. Effectivenes of this surgery depends on surgical technique, completeness of cytoreduction, and extent of disease. It also can be helpful in people who had their first surgery done by a generalist and in epithelial
fluid has accumulated in the abdomen, and overall health. Effectivenes of this surgery depends on surgical technique, completeness of cytoreduction, and extent of disease. It also can be helpful in people who had their first surgery done by a generalist and in epithelial ovarian cancer. Secondary surgery
can cause osteoporosis. After surgery, hormone replacement therapy can be considered, especially in younger women. This therapy can consist of a combination of estrogen and progesterone, or estrogen alone. Estrogen alone is safe after hysterectomy; when the uterus is still present, unopposed estrogen dramatically raises
FIGO stage I ovarian cancer. There is also no apparent difference between total abdominal hysterectomy and supracervical hysterectomy for advanced cancers. Approximately 2.8% of people having a first surgery for advanced ovarian cancer die within two weeks of the surgery (2.8% perioperative mortality rate). More aggressive
. More aggressive surgeries are associated with better outcomes in advanced (stage III or IV) ovarian cancer.Chemotherapy has been a general standard of care for ovarian cancer for decades, although with variable protocols. Chemotherapy is used after surgery to treat any residual disease, if appropriate.
cannot be completely removed or optimally debulked via surgery. Though it has not been shown to increase survival, it can reduce the risk of complications after surgery. If a unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy or other surgery is performed, additional chemotherapy, called "adjuvant chemotherapy", can
recurring compared to no adjuvant therapy in women with early stage epithelial ovarian cancer.Chemotherapy in ovarian cancer typically consists of platins, a group of platinum-based drugs, combined with non-platins. Common therapies can include paclitaxel, cisplatin, topotecan, doxorubicin, epirubicin, and
with paclitaxel. Carboplatin is superior to cisplatin in that it is less toxic and has fewer side effects, generally allowing for an improved quality of life in comparison, though both are similarly effective. Three-drug regimens have not been found to be more effective, and platins alone
cause anemia; intravenous iron has been found to be more effective than oral iron supplements in reducing the need for blood transfusions. Typical cycles of treatment involve one treatment every 3 weeks, repeated for 6 weeks or more. Fewer than 6 weeks (cycles) of treatment is less
) of treatment is less effective than 6 weeks or more. Germ-cell malignancies are treated differently than other ovarian cancers — a regimen of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) is used with 5 days of chemotherapy administered every 3 weeks for 3 to 4 cycles.
malignancies are treated differently than other ovarian cancers — a regimen of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) is used with 5 days of chemotherapy administered every 3 weeks for 3 to 4 cycles. Chemotherapy for germ cell tumors has not been shown to cause amenorrhea, infertility,
difference in survival is seen between treating asymptomatic (elevated CA-125) and symptomatic recurrences.For platinum-sensitive tumors, platins are the drugs of choice for second-line chemotherapy, in combination with other cytotoxic agents. Regimens include carboplatin combined with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, gemcitabine, or
or platins.If the tumor is determined to be platinum-resistant, vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide (VAC) or some combination of paclitaxel, gemcitabine, and oxaliplatin may be used as a second-line therapy.For platinum-resistant tumors, there are no high
-efficacy chemotherapy options. Single-drug regimens (doxorubicin or topotecan) do not have high response rates, but single-drug regimens of topotecan, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or gemcitabine are used in some cases. Topotecan cannot be used in people with an intestinal blockage.
only preliminary results are available.Dysgerminomas are most effectively treated with radiation, though this can cause infertility and is being phased out in favor of chemotherapy. Radiation therapy does not improve survival in people with well-differentiated tumors.In stage 1c and 2 cancers, radiation therapy is
in the pelvis but the abdomen is cancer-free. Radiotherapy can also be used in palliative care of advanced cancers. A typical course of radiotherapy for ovarian cancer is 5 days a week for 3–4 weeks. Common side effects of radiotherapy include diarrhea, constipation, and frequent urination
palliative care of advanced cancers. A typical course of radiotherapy for ovarian cancer is 5 days a week for 3–4 weeks. Common side effects of radiotherapy include diarrhea, constipation, and frequent urination.Despite the fact that 60% of ovarian tumors have estrogen receptors, ovarian cancer is
that 60% of ovarian tumors have estrogen receptors, ovarian cancer is only rarely responsive to hormonal treatments. A Cochrane review found a lack of evidence about the effects of tamoxifen in people with relapsed ovarian cancer.Estrogen alone does not have an effect on the cancer, and tamoxifen
tumors have estrogen receptors, ovarian cancer is only rarely responsive to hormonal treatments. A Cochrane review found a lack of evidence about the effects of tamoxifen in people with relapsed ovarian cancer.Estrogen alone does not have an effect on the cancer, and tamoxifen and letrozole are rarely effective
-up is CA-125 level. However, treatment based only on elevated CA-125 levels and not any symptoms can increase side effects without any prolongation of life, so the implication of the outcome of a CA-125 test can be discussed before taking it. The recommendation as of 2014 is recurrent
stromal cancers, tests for hormones like estrogen, testosterone, and inhibin are sometimes helpful. Inhibin can also be useful for monitoring the progress of sex-cord tumors, along with mullerian inhibiting substance. AFP can also be used to monitor Sertoli-Leydig tumors. In dysgerminomas,
be used if desired, though this is not common. If a tumor is easily imaged, imaging may be used to monitor the progress of treatment.Palliative care focuses on relieving symptoms and increasing or maintaining quality of life. This type of treatment's purpose is not to cure
is easily imaged, imaging may be used to monitor the progress of treatment.Palliative care focuses on relieving symptoms and increasing or maintaining quality of life. This type of treatment's purpose is not to cure the cancer but to make the woman more comfortable while living with cancer that
may be used to monitor the progress of treatment.Palliative care focuses on relieving symptoms and increasing or maintaining quality of life. This type of treatment's purpose is not to cure the cancer but to make the woman more comfortable while living with cancer that can not be cured.
used to monitor the progress of treatment.Palliative care focuses on relieving symptoms and increasing or maintaining quality of life. This type of treatment's purpose is not to cure the cancer but to make the woman more comfortable while living with cancer that can not be cured. It has
significant symptoms. In platinum-refractory and platinum-resistant cases, other palliative chemotherapy is the main treatment.Palliative care can entail treatment of symptoms and complications of the cancer, including pain, nausea, constipation, ascites, bowel obstruction, edema, pleural effusion, and mucositis
constipation, ascites, bowel obstruction, edema, pleural effusion, and mucositis.  Especially if the cancer advances and becomes incurable, treatment of symptoms becomes one of the main goals of therapy.  Palliative care can also entail helping with decision-making such as if or when
, pleural effusion, and mucositis.  Especially if the cancer advances and becomes incurable, treatment of symptoms becomes one of the main goals of therapy.  Palliative care can also entail helping with decision-making such as if or when hospice care is appropriate, and the preferred
also entail helping with decision-making such as if or when hospice care is appropriate, and the preferred place for the patient at end of life care.Bowel obstruction can be treated with palliative surgery (colostomy, ileostomy, or internal bypass) or medicine, but surgery has
Palliative surgery may result in short bowel syndrome, enterocutaneous fistula, or re-obstruction; or may not be possible due to the extent of obstruction. Other treatments of complications can include total parenteral nutrition, a low-residue diet, palliative gastrostomy, and adequate pain control.
short bowel syndrome, enterocutaneous fistula, or re-obstruction; or may not be possible due to the extent of obstruction. Other treatments of complications can include total parenteral nutrition, a low-residue diet, palliative gastrostomy, and adequate pain control. Bowel obstruction can also be
since it can help to shrink tumors that are causing symptoms. Palliative radiotherapy typically lasts for only a few treatments, a much shorter course of therapy than non-palliative radiotherapy. It is also used for palliation of chemotherapy-resistant germ cell tumors.Ovarian cancer has a significant
typically lasts for only a few treatments, a much shorter course of therapy than non-palliative radiotherapy. It is also used for palliation of chemotherapy-resistant germ cell tumors.Ovarian cancer has a significant effect on quality of life, psychological health and well-being. Interventions
-palliative radiotherapy. It is also used for palliation of chemotherapy-resistant germ cell tumors.Ovarian cancer has a significant effect on quality of life, psychological health and well-being. Interventions are available to help with the needs and social support. Many ovarian cancer survivors report
health and well-being. Interventions are available to help with the needs and social support. Many ovarian cancer survivors report a good quality of life and optimism. Others reported a "spiritual change" that helped them find meaning during their experience. Others have described their loss of
of life and optimism. Others reported a "spiritual change" that helped them find meaning during their experience. Others have described their loss of faith after their diagnosis with ovarian cancer. Those who have gone through treatment sometimes experience social isolation but benefit from having relationships with other survivors
who have expressed their inability to care for their family.Self-esteem and body image changes can occur due to hair loss, removal of ovaries and other reproductive structures, and scars. There is some improvement after hair grows in. Sexual issues can develop. The removal of
of ovaries and other reproductive structures, and scars. There is some improvement after hair grows in. Sexual issues can develop. The removal of ovaries results in surgically-induced menopause that can result in painful intercourse, vaginal dryness, loss of sexual desire and being tired. Though
cancer at higher rates than in the general population. The same psychosocial problems can develop in family members. Emotional effects can include a fear of death, sadness, memory problems and difficulty in concentrating. When optimism was adopted by those at the beginning of their treatment, they were
recurring may have difficulty in expressing joy even when disease-free. The more treatments that a woman undergoes, the more likely the loss of hope is expressed. Women often can cope and reduce negative psychosocial effects by a number of strategies. Activities such as traveling, spending additional
a woman undergoes, the more likely the loss of hope is expressed. Women often can cope and reduce negative psychosocial effects by a number of strategies. Activities such as traveling, spending additional time with family and friends, ignoring statistics, journaling and increasing involvement in spiritually-based
and increasing involvement in spiritually-based events are adaptive.Women with ovarian cancer may also experience difficulties with their diet and are at risk of malnutrition.Ovarian cancer usually has a relatively poor prognosis. It is disproportionately deadly because it lacks any clear early detection or screening test,
more readily than low-grade tumors. Typically, tumor cells begin to metastasize by growing in the peritoneal cavity. More than 60% of women presenting with ovarian cancer have stage-III or stage-IV cancer, when it has already spread beyond the ovaries. Ovarian cancers
disease, when the cancer is still confined to the primary site, the five-year survival rate is 92.7%. About 70% of women with advanced disease respond to initial treatment, most of whom attain complete remission, but half of these women experience a recurrence 1–4 years
have a very favorable prognosis. In early stages, they have a five-year survival rate of 96.9%. Around two-thirds of dysgerminomas are diagnosed at stage I. Stage-III dysgerminomas have a five-year survival of 61%; when treated with BEP chemotherapy after
of various organs, ascites, and intestinal obstructions, which can be fatal. Intestinal obstructions in multiple sites are the most common proximate cause of death. Intestinal obstruction in ovarian cancer can either be a true obstruction, where tumor blocks the intestinal lumen, or a pseudo-obstruction
be a true obstruction, where tumor blocks the intestinal lumen, or a pseudo-obstruction, when tumor prevents normal peristalsis. Continuous accumulation of ascites can be treated by placing a drain that can be self-drained.There are a number of prognostic factors in ovarian cancer.
that can be self-drained.There are a number of prognostic factors in ovarian cancer. Positive prognostic factors - those indicating better chances of survival - include no residual disease after surgery (stage III/IV), complete macroscopic resection (stage IV), BRCA2 mutations,
CA-125 levels. There is conflicting evidence for BRCA1 as a prognostic factor. Conversely, negative prognostic factors - those that indicate a worse chance of survival - include rupture of the ovarian capsule during surgery, older age (over 45 years), mucinous type, stage IV, high
), mucinous type, stage IV, high histologic grade, clear cell type, upper abdominal involvement, high CA-125 levels, the presence of tumor cells in the blood, and elevated cyclooxygenase-2.Expression of various mRNAs can also be prognostic for ovarian cancer. High levels of Drosha and Dicer
of various mRNAs can also be prognostic for ovarian cancer. High levels of Drosha and Dicer are associated with improved survival, whereas high levels of let-7b, HIF1A, EphA1, and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase are associated with worse survival. Cancers that are positive for WT1 carry a
are based on patients diagnosed from 2004 to 2010.Ovarian cancer frequently recurs after treatment. Overall, in a 5-year period, 20% of stage I and II cancers recur. Most recurrences are in the abdomen. If a recurrence occurs in advanced disease, it typically occurs within
free interval tends to shorten and chemoresistance increases with each recurrence. When a dysgerminoma recurs, it is most likely to recur within a year of diagnosis, and other malignant germ cell tumors recur within 2 years 90% of the time. Germ cell tumors other than dysgerminomas have a
with a 10% long-term survival rate. Low malignant potential tumors rarely relapse, even when fertility-sparing surgery is the treatment of choice. 15% of LMP tumors relapse after unilateral surgery in the previously unaffected ovary, and they are typically easily treated with surgery.
yearly. The overall lifetime risk in the US is around 1.6% In the US, ovarian cancer affects 1.3–1.4% and is the cause of death of about 1% of women. In the United States, it is also the fifth-most common cancer in women but the
in the US is around 1.6% In the US, ovarian cancer affects 1.3–1.4% and is the cause of death of about 1% of women. In the United States, it is also the fifth-most common cancer in women but the fourth-most common cause of
of women. In the United States, it is also the fifth-most common cancer in women but the fourth-most common cause of cancer death. This decrease made it the ninth-most common cancer in women.The risks from developing specific types of ovarian cancer varies
young people, sex-cord stromal tumors and germ cell tumors total 1% of overall ovarian cancer. Ovarian cancer represents approximately 4% of cancers diagnosed in women.It is the 5th most common cancer in UK women. In the UK, the incidence rate over the whole
women in the UK (around 7,100 women were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and it is the fifth-most common cause of cancer death in women (around 4,300 women died in 2012).Black women have twice the risk for sex cord-stromal tumors compared to non-
when an adnexal mass is found on examination (in 1–2% of all pregnancies), a tumor is seen on ultrasound, or the parent's level of alpha-fetoprotein is elevated. Dermoid cysts and dysgerminomas are the most common germ cell tumors during pregnancy. Germ cell tumors diagnosed
an adnexal mass is found on examination (in 1–2% of all pregnancies), a tumor is seen on ultrasound, or the parent's level of alpha-fetoprotein is elevated. Dermoid cysts and dysgerminomas are the most common germ cell tumors during pregnancy. Germ cell tumors diagnosed
mass is found on examination (in 1–2% of all pregnancies), a tumor is seen on ultrasound, or the parent's level of alpha-fetoprotein is elevated. Dermoid cysts and dysgerminomas are the most common germ cell tumors during pregnancy. Germ cell tumors diagnosed during pregnancy
diagnosed during pregnancy are unlikely to have metastasized and can be treated by surgery and, in some cases, chemotherapy, which carries the risk of birth defects. Yolk sac tumors and immature teratomas grow particularly quickly and are usually treated with chemotherapy even during pregnancy; however, dysgerminomas that
cancer is also going on. Recent research shows that thrombocytosis predicts lower survival and higher stage cancer. Ongoing research is also investigating the benefits of surgery for recurrent ovarian cancer.While an active area of research, as of 2018 there is no goodevidence that immunotherapy is effective for ovarian
predicts lower survival and higher stage cancer. Ongoing research is also investigating the benefits of surgery for recurrent ovarian cancer.While an active area of research, as of 2018 there is no goodevidence that immunotherapy is effective for ovarian cancer. However, trials of the antibody and VEGF inhibitor
the growth of new blood vessels in the cancer, have shown promising results, especially in combination with pazopanib, which also slows the process of blood vessel growth. Bevacizumab has been particularly effective in preliminary studies on stage-III and -IV cancer and has been cited as having at
Trebananib and tasquinimod are other angiogenesis inhibitors being investigated. The monoclonal antibody farletuzumab is being researched as an adjuvant to traditional chemotherapy. Another type of immunotherapy involves vaccines, including TroVax.An alternative to BEP chemotherapy, a regimen of 3 cycles of carboplatin and etoposide, is a current
adjuvant to traditional chemotherapy. Another type of immunotherapy involves vaccines, including TroVax.An alternative to BEP chemotherapy, a regimen of 3 cycles of carboplatin and etoposide, is a current topic of research for germ cell malignancies.Intraperitoneal chemotherapy has also been under investigation during the 2000s and
involves vaccines, including TroVax.An alternative to BEP chemotherapy, a regimen of 3 cycles of carboplatin and etoposide, is a current topic of research for germ cell malignancies.Intraperitoneal chemotherapy has also been under investigation during the 2000s and 2010s for its potential to deliver higher doses of
Nintedanib is being researched as a potential therapy in combination with cyclophosphamide for people with recurrences.Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are another area of research.Hormone therapies are a topic of current research in ovarian cancer, particularly, the value of certain medications used to treat breast cancer
to treat breast cancer. These include tamoxifen, letrozole, and anastrozole. Preliminary studies have showed a benefit for tamoxifen in a small number of people with advanced ovarian cancer. Letrozole may help to slow or stop growth of estrogen receptor positive ovarian cancer. Anastrozole is being investigated in
studies have showed a benefit for tamoxifen in a small number of people with advanced ovarian cancer. Letrozole may help to slow or stop growth of estrogen receptor positive ovarian cancer. Anastrozole is being investigated in postmenopausal people with estrogen receptor-positive cancer.Research into mitigating side effects of
people with estrogen receptor-positive cancer.Research into mitigating side effects of ovarian cancer treatment is also ongoing. Radiation fibrosis, the formation of scar tissue in an area treated with radiation, may be relieved with hyperbaric oxygen therapy, but research has not been completed in this area
may be birth defects resulting from errors during development of the embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information
embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information or providing regulatory functions at somatic sites.Extragonadal GCTs were
classes reflect an important clinical difference. Compared to germinomatous tumors, nongerminomatous tumors tend to grow faster, have an earlier mean age at time of diagnosis ( around 25 years versus 35 years, in the case of testicular cancers), and have a lower five-year survival rate
radiation, and they also respond well to chemotherapy.  The prognosis for nongerminomatous tumours has improved dramatically, however, due to the use of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens.Mixed germ cell tumors occur in many forms.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal
.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal sinus tumor.Teratocarcinoma refers to a germ cell tumor that is a mixture of teratoma with embryonal carcinoma, or with choriocarcinoma, or with both.  This kind of mixed germ cell tumor may be known simply as
neonates, infants, and children younger than 4 years, most are sacrococcygeal teratomas.Males with Klinefelter syndrome have a 50 times greater risk of GSTs.  In these persons, GSTs usually contain nonseminomatous elements, present at an earlier age, and seldom are gonadal in location.
are being evaluated for tumors that do not respond to chemotherapy.The 1997 International Germ Cell Consensus Classification is a tool for estimating the risk of relapse after treatment of malignant germ-cell tumor.A small study of ovarian tumors in girls reports a correlation between cystic and benign tumors
can be estimated by ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan before surgery, this permits selection of the most appropriate surgical plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found
plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found that for 454 men with nonseminomatous (nongerminomatous) GCTs diagnosed between 1975 and 1989, five-year survival increased over
the hypopharynx (last part of the pharynx), which is split into three areas. Progression of the disease is defined by the spread of cancer into one or more areas and into deeper tissues.This type of cancer is rare. Only about 2,500 cases are seen in the
three areas. Progression of the disease is defined by the spread of cancer into one or more areas and into deeper tissues.This type of cancer is rare. Only about 2,500 cases are seen in the US each year.  Because of this, Hypopharyngeal Cancer is difficult to
may change a normal DNA sequence to an oncogene, a gene that causes cancer after exposure to a carcinogen.Squamous cells, a type of cell that lines hollow organs like the throat, mouth, lungs, and outer layer of skin, are particularly vulnerable when exposed to cigarette
to a carcinogen.Squamous cells, a type of cell that lines hollow organs like the throat, mouth, lungs, and outer layer of skin, are particularly vulnerable when exposed to cigarette smoke.Chewing tobacco can have the same effects as smoking and is also linked to hypopharyngeal
to the esophagus.Heavy alcohol use is linked to hypopharyngeal cancer as well. Alcohol damages the lining of the hypopharynx, increasing the amount of chemicals that are allowed to seep into the underlying membranes. Heavy alcohol use is also associated with nutritional deficiencies.A disease called Plummer–
term iron deficiency, may also lead to hypopharyngeal cancer. Other factors like a deficiency in certain vitamins also appear to contribute to this type of cancer.Staging cancer is a way of marking the cancer’s progression and is measured on a 0 to 4 (IV) scale.
were developed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer. Early stage Stage 0This implies that a tumor was found in the epithelium, the layer of tissue closest to the top, but not in the connective tissue. A patient would not have swollen lymph nodes and the cancer has not
no lymph node involvement and no metastasis.Stage I Hypopharyngeal Cancer has a five-year survival rate of 41%, but this type of cancer is rarely caught in Stage I because the first signs and symptoms are often unnoticed or patients remain asymptomatic.Stage II (2)T2:
involvement.Note: The distinction between the two is made by the oncologist.Stage II and III have a five-year survival rate of 36%.Stage IV (4)The final stage has three subsets depending on the severity of the cancer.Stage IVAT1 or T2 or T3: the tumor
N2: cancer is affecting 1 or more lymph nodes that are between less than 3 and less than 6 cm on one or both sides of thethroat.Stage IVBT4: The tumor is affecting areas outside of the hypopharynx.N1 or N2 or N3: Lymph nodes are between less
see directly down the throat.Biopsy:This is a small tissue sample taken from the lesion. The tissue is analyzed for the presences of cancer cells.CT scan or MRI:These tests will give doctors a detailed cross-sectional image of the area in question in the
a detailed cross-sectional image of the area in question in the body. It can confirm or suggest a diagnosis and also stage extent of disease. Treatment of hypopharyngeal cancer depends on the prognosis (chance of recovery), age, stage, and general health of the patient
body. It can confirm or suggest a diagnosis and also stage extent of disease. Treatment of hypopharyngeal cancer depends on the prognosis (chance of recovery), age, stage, and general health of the patient. Because hypopharyngeal cancer is often advanced at the time of diagnosis,
(chance of recovery), age, stage, and general health of the patient. Because hypopharyngeal cancer is often advanced at the time of diagnosis, treatment also depends on the overall goal. The goal may simply be to keep the patient talking, eating, and breathing normally
The goal may simply be to keep the patient talking, eating, and breathing normally.Treatment usually begins with surgery and then a course of radiation for cancer that has progressed past Stage I. For cancer that is advanced, which is typical of hypopharyngeal cancer, neoadjuvant chemotherapy may be
Other symptoms may include difficult or painful swallowing, new lumps or bumps in the neck, a swelling in the mouth, or a feeling of numbness in the mouth or lips.Risk factors include tobacco and alcohol use. With both tobacco and drinking alcohol, the risk of oral
times greater. Other risk factors include HPV infection, chewing paan, and sun exposure on the lower lip. Oral cancer is a subgroup of head and neck cancers. Diagnosis is made by biopsy of the concerning area, followed by investigation with CT scan, MRI, PET scan
Oral cancer can be prevented by avoiding tobacco products, limiting alcohol use, sun protection on the lower lip, HPV vaccination, and avoidance of paan. Treatments used for oral cancer can include a combination of surgery (to remove the tumor and regional lymph nodes), radiation therapy
use, sun protection on the lower lip, HPV vaccination, and avoidance of paan. Treatments used for oral cancer can include a combination of surgery (to remove the tumor and regional lymph nodes), radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or targeted therapy.  The types of treatments
combination of surgery (to remove the tumor and regional lymph nodes), radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or targeted therapy.  The types of treatments will depend on the size, locations, and spread of the cancer taken into consideration with the general health of the person.In
commonly a mass. It can also be associated with a white patch, loose teeth, bleeding gums, persistent ear ache, a feeling of numbness in the lip and chin, or swelling.When the cancer extends to the throat, there can also be difficulty swallowing, painful
of which is tobacco. Like all environmental factors, the rate at which cancer will develop is dependent on the dose, frequency and method of application of the carcinogen (the substance that is causing the cancer). Aside from cigarette smoking, other carcinogens for oral cancer include alcohol
-containing mouthwashes as also being potential causes. The claim was that constant exposure to these alcohol-containing rinses, even in the absence of smoking and drinking, leads to significant increases in the development of oral cancer. However, studies conducted in 1985, 1995, and 2003
evidence does not support a connection between oral cancer and alcohol-containing mouthrinse". A 2008 study suggests that acetaldehyde (a breakdown product of alcohol) is implicated in oral cancer, but this study specifically focused on abusers of alcohol and made no reference to mouthwash.Infection with
A 2008 study suggests that acetaldehyde (a breakdown product of alcohol) is implicated in oral cancer, but this study specifically focused on abusers of alcohol and made no reference to mouthwash.Infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), particularly type 16 (there are over 180 types)
to 1, males over females 3 to 1, and 75% of the time people who have used tobacco products or are heavy users of alcohol. This new and rapidly growing subpopulation between 30 and 50 years old, is predominantly nonsmoking, white, and males slightly outnumber females
tobacco caused disease.Chewing betel, paan and Areca is known to be a strong risk factor for developing oral cancer even in the absence of tobacco. It increases the rate of oral cancer 2.1 times, through a variety of genetic and related effects through local irritation of the mucous
actinic cheilitis. In the Indian subcontinent oral submucous fibrosis is very common due to betel nut chewing. This condition is characterized by limited opening of mouth and burning sensation on eating of spicy food. This is a progressive lesion in which the opening of the mouth becomes progressively limited,
(2) staging, and (3) treatment planning. A complete history, and clinical examination is first completed, then a wedge of tissue is cut from the suspicious lesion for tissue diagnosis. This might be done with scalpel biopsy, punch biopsy, fine or core needle
structure. They may add additional information that can be used in staging, and treatment planning, such as the mitotic rate, the depth of invasion, and the HPV status of the tissue.After the tissue is confirmed cancerous, other tests will be completed to:better assess
the body (chest X-ray, nuclear medicine).Other, more invasive tests, may also be completed such as fine needle aspiration, biopsy of lymph nodes, and sentinel node biopsy. When the cancer has spread to lymph nodes, their exact location, size, and spread beyond
the lymph nodes) needs to be determined, as each can have a significant impact on treatment and prognosis. Small differences in the pattern of lymph node spread, can have a significant impact on treatment and prognosis. Panendoscopy may be recommended, because the tissues of the entire upper
removed to determine the prognosis, need for additional surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, immunotherapy, or other interventions.Oral cancer is a subgroup of head and neck cancers which includes those of the oropharynx, larynx, nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses,  salivary glands, and thyroid gland
those of the oropharynx, larynx, nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses,  salivary glands, and thyroid gland. Oral melanoma, while part of head and neck cancers is considered separately. Other cancers can occur in the mouth (such as bone cancer, lymphoma, or metastatic cancers
, or metastatic cancers from distant sites) but are also considered separately from oral cancers.Oral cancer staging is an assessment of the degree of spread of the cancer from its original source. It is one of the factors affecting both the prognosis and the potential treatment of oral cancer
to be classified into a prognostic staging group;The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) in 2013 stated evidence was insufficient to determine the balance of benefits and harms of screening for oral cancer in adults without symptoms by primary care providers. The American Academy of Family Physicians comes to similar
years who have periodic health examinations should have the oral cavity examined for cancer. The American Dental Association recommends that providers remain alert for signs of cancer during routine examinations.There are a variety of screening devices, however, there is no evidence that routine use of these devices in
cavity examined for cancer. The American Dental Association recommends that providers remain alert for signs of cancer during routine examinations.There are a variety of screening devices, however, there is no evidence that routine use of these devices in general dental practice is helpful. However, there are
evidence that routine use of these devices in general dental practice is helpful. However, there are compelling reasons to be concerned about the risk of harm this device may cause if routinely used in general practice. Such harms include false positives, unnecessary surgical biopsies and a financial burden.
surgery or radiation will cause severe limited mouth opening, part of the bone is also removed with the tumor. Management of the neck Spread of cancer from the oral cavity to the lymph nodes of the neck has a significant effect on survival. Between 60–70% of people with early
the neck Spread of cancer from the oral cavity to the lymph nodes of the neck has a significant effect on survival. Between 60–70% of people with early stage oral cancer will have no lymph node involvement of the neck clinically, but 20–30% of those people (or up
the neck clinically, but 20–30% of those people (or up to 20% of all those affected) will have clinically undetectable spread of cancer to the lymph nodes of the neck (called occult disease).The management of the neck is crucial, since spread to it reduces the chance
cancer to the lymph nodes of the neck (called occult disease).The management of the neck is crucial, since spread to it reduces the chance of survival by 50%. If there is evidence of lymph node involvement of the neck, during the diagnostic phase, then a modified radical
occult disease).The management of the neck is crucial, since spread to it reduces the chance of survival by 50%. If there is evidence of lymph node involvement of the neck, during the diagnostic phase, then a modified radical neck dissection is generally performed. Where the neck lymph
the neck, during the diagnostic phase, then a modified radical neck dissection is generally performed. Where the neck lymph nodes have no evidence of involvement clinically, but the oral cavity lesion is high risk for spread (e.g. T2 or above lesions), then a neck dissection of
pathologists may be involved at this stage. Treatment of oral cancer will usually be by a multidisciplinary team, with treatment professionals from the realms of radiation, surgery, chemotherapy, nutrition, dentistry, and even psychology all possibly involved with diagnosis, treatment, rehabilitation, and care.
oropharyngeal cancer. It is estimated that there were 61,400 cases of oral and lip cancer within Europe in 2012. Hungary recorded the highest number of mortality and morbidity due to oral and pharyngeal cancer among all European countries while Cyprus reported the lowest numbers  United Kingdom British Cancer Research found
Research found 2,386 deaths due to oral cancer in 2014; other studies show this is particularly within the elder population category; only 6% of people affected by oral cancer are under 45. The UK is 16th-lowest for males and 11th-highest for females for oral cancer
UK (around 6,800 people were diagnosed with oral cancer in the UK in 2011), and it is the nineteenth-most -common cause of cancer death (around 2,100 people died from the disease in 2012). Northern Europe The highest incidence of oral and pharyngeal cancer was recorded
incidence rate of oral and pharyngeal cancer in Denmark could be attributed to their higher alcohol intake than citizens of other Scandinavian countries and low intake of fruits and vegetables in general. Eastern Europe Hungary (23.3), Slovakia (16.4), and Romania (15.5) reported the highest
cancer, and nearly 12000 from the mouth, and the remainder from the oral cavity and pharynx. In the previous year, 1.6% of lip and oral cavity cancers were diagnosed, where the age-standardised incidence rate (ASIR) across all geographic regions of United States of
diagnosed, with incidence rates being more than twice as high in men than women.Oral cancer is one of the most-common types of cancer in Asia due to its association with smoking (tobacco, bidi), betel quid and alcohol consumption. Regionally incidence varies with highest
oral cancer ranged from 1.6 to 8.6/ 100,000 and 1.8 to 2.13/ 100,000 respectively. According to GLOBOCAN 2012, the estimated age-standardised rates of cancer incidence and mortality was higher in males than females. However, in some areas, specifically South East Asia, similar rates were recorded
51–55. In 2012, there were 97,400 deaths recorded due to oral cancer. India Oral cancer is the third-most-common form of cancer in India with over 77 000 new cases diagnosed in 2012 (2.3:1 male to female ratio). Studies estimate over five deaths per
2.3:1 male to female ratio). Studies estimate over five deaths per hour. One of the reasons behind such high incidence might be popularity of betel and areca nuts, which are considered to be risk factors for development of oral cavity cancers.There is limited data for the prevalence
parts of the mouth. The data suggests lip cancer has the highest incidence rate while gingival cancer has the lowest rate overall. In terms of mortality rates, oropharyngeal cancer has the highest rate in males and tongue cancer has the highest rate in females. Lip, palatal and gingival
for GIST led to the exclusion of many tumors that had been considered as GIST previously, and also the incorporation of a much larger number of tumors that had been labeled as other types of sarcomas and undifferentiated carcinomas.  For example, some previous diagnoses of stomach and small bowel
that had been considered as GIST previously, and also the incorporation of a much larger number of tumors that had been labeled as other types of sarcomas and undifferentiated carcinomas.  For example, some previous diagnoses of stomach and small bowel leiomyosarcomas (malignant tumor of smooth muscle) would
a much larger number of tumors that had been labeled as other types of sarcomas and undifferentiated carcinomas.  For example, some previous diagnoses of stomach and small bowel leiomyosarcomas (malignant tumor of smooth muscle) would be reclassified as GISTs on the basis of immunohistochemical staining. All GIST
edition) / UICC. Nonetheless, different GISTs have different risk assessments of their tendency to recur or to metastasize, dependent on their site of origin, size, and number of mitotic figures.Due to the change in definition, clinical pathways of care before the year 2000 are
metastasize, dependent on their site of origin, size, and number of mitotic figures.Due to the change in definition, clinical pathways of care before the year 2000 are largely uninformative in the current era.GISTs may present with trouble swallowing, gastrointestinal bleeding, or metastases (
swallowing, gastrointestinal bleeding, or metastases (mainly in the liver). Intestinal obstruction is rare, due to the tumor's outward pattern of growth. Often, there is a history of vague abdominal pain or discomfort, and the tumor has become rather large by time the diagnosis
Most GISTs are sporadic. Less than 5% occur as part of hereditary familial or idiopathic multitumor syndromes. These include, in descending order of frequency, neurofibromatosis Recklinghausen (NF-1), Carney's triad (gastric GIST, pulmonary chondroma and extra-adrenal paraganglioma), germline gain
scf). The abnormal c-KIT pathway most commonly (85%) arises from mutation of the gene itself; a smaller subset of c-KIT-associated GISTs are associated with constitutive activity of the KIT enzymatic pathway, found by immunoblotting.  The c-KIT
exons 11, 9 and rarely 13 and 17 of the c-KIT gene are known to occur in GIST. The tyrosine kinase function of c-KIT is important in the medical therapy for GISTs, as described below. KIT-D816V point mutations in c-KIT exon
radiology section).The definitive diagnosis is made with a biopsy, which can be obtained endoscopically, percutaneously with CT or ultrasound guidance or at the time of surgery. A biopsy sample will be investigated under the microscope by a pathologist physician. The pathologist examines the histopathology to identify the characteristics of
of Kit and PDGFRA can be used to prove the diagnosis.The purpose of radiologic imaging is to locate the lesion, evaluate for signs of invasion and detect metastasis. Features of GIST vary depending on tumor size and organ of origin. The diameter can range from a few millimeters
imaging is to locate the lesion, evaluate for signs of invasion and detect metastasis. Features of GIST vary depending on tumor size and organ of origin. The diameter can range from a few millimeters to more than 30 cm.  Larger tumors usually cause symptoms in contrast to those
x-ray, stomach GISTs may appear as a radiopaque mass altering the shape of the gastric air shadow. Intestinal GISTs may displace loops of bowel and larger tumors may obstruct the bowel and films will show an obstructive pattern. If cavitations are present, plain radiographs will show collections
bowel and larger tumors may obstruct the bowel and films will show an obstructive pattern. If cavitations are present, plain radiographs will show collections of air within the tumor. Calcification is an unusual feature of GIST but if present can be visible on plain films.Barium fluoroscopic examinations and
to evaluate abdominal cavities and other abdominal organs with a barium swallow alone. In a CT scan, abnormalities may be seen in 87% of patients and it should be made with both oral and intravenous contrast.  Among imaging studies, MRI has the best tissue contrast, which
be made with both oral and intravenous contrast.  Among imaging studies, MRI has the best tissue contrast, which aids in the identification of masses within the GI tract (intramural masses). Intravenous contrast material is needed to evaluate lesion vascularity.Preferred imaging modalities in the evaluation
invasion, ascites, and metastases. The ability of MRI to produce images in multiple planes is helpful in determining the bowel as the organ of origin (which is difficult when the tumor is very large), facilitating diagnosis. Small GISTs Since GISTs arise from the bowel layer called
or obtuse angles with the nearby bowel wall, as seen with any other intramural mass. The mucosal surface is usually intact except for areas of ulceration, which are generally present in 50% of GISTs. Ulcerations fill with barium causing a bull's eye or target lesion appearance.
seen with any other intramural mass. The mucosal surface is usually intact except for areas of ulceration, which are generally present in 50% of GISTs. Ulcerations fill with barium causing a bull's eye or target lesion appearance. In contrast-enhanced CT, small GISTs are seen
is usually intact except for areas of ulceration, which are generally present in 50% of GISTs. Ulcerations fill with barium causing a bull's eye or target lesion appearance. In contrast-enhanced CT, small GISTs are seen as smooth, sharply defined intramural masses with homogeneous attenuation
, necrosis or cysts, which is radiographically seen as a peripheral enhancement pattern with a low attenuation center. In MRI studies, the degree of necrosis and bleeding affects the signal intensity pattern. Areas of bleeding within the tumor will vary its signal intensity depending on how long ago the
peripheral enhancement pattern with a low attenuation center. In MRI studies, the degree of necrosis and bleeding affects the signal intensity pattern. Areas of bleeding within the tumor will vary its signal intensity depending on how long ago the bleeding occurred. The solid portions of the tumor are typically
the tumor are typically low signal intensity on T1-weighted images, are high signal intensity on T2-weighted images and enhance after administration of gadolinium. Signal-intensity voids are present if there is gas within areas of necrotic tumor. Features of malignancy Malignancy is characterized by local
weighted images and enhance after administration of gadolinium. Signal-intensity voids are present if there is gas within areas of necrotic tumor. Features of malignancy Malignancy is characterized by local invasion and metastases, usually to the liver, omentum and peritoneum. However, cases of metastases to bone
tumor. Features of malignancy Malignancy is characterized by local invasion and metastases, usually to the liver, omentum and peritoneum. However, cases of metastases to bone, pleura, lungs and retroperitoneum have been seen. In distinction to gastric adenocarcinoma or gastric/small bowel lymphoma, malignant
gastric/small bowel lymphoma, malignant lymphadenopathy (swollen lymph nodes) is uncommon (<10%) and thus imaging usually shows absence of lymph node enlargement. If metastases are not present, other radiologic features suggesting malignancy include: size (>5 cm), heterogeneous enhancement
and definitive diagnosis must be made immunochemically.Localized, resectable adult GISTs, if  anatomically and physiologically feasible, surgery is the primary treatment of choice. Surgery can be potentially curative, but watchful waiting may be considered in small tumors in carefully selected situations. Post-surgical adjuvant
in small tumors in carefully selected situations. Post-surgical adjuvant treatment may be recommended. Lymph node metastases are rare, and routine removal of lymph nodes is typically not necessary. Laparoscopic surgery, a minimally invasive abdominal surgery using telescopes and specialized instruments, has been shown to be
both tumour size and mitotic activity, and permit less radical sphincter-preserving surgery.A substantial proportion of GIST tumors have a high risk of recurrence as estimated by a number of validated risk stratification schemes, and can be considered for adjuvant therapy. The selection criteria underpinning the decision
by a number of validated risk stratification schemes, and can be considered for adjuvant therapy. The selection criteria underpinning the decision for possible use of imatinib in these settings include a risk assessment based on pathological factors such as tumor size, mitotic rate, and location can be used to
settings include a risk assessment based on pathological factors such as tumor size, mitotic rate, and location can be used to predict the risk of recurrence in GIST patients. Tumors <2 cm with a mitotic rate of <5/50 HPF have been shown to have lower risk of recurrence
mitotic rate, and location can be used to predict the risk of recurrence in GIST patients. Tumors <2 cm with a mitotic rate of <5/50 HPF have been shown to have lower risk of recurrence than larger or more aggressive tumors. Following surgical resection of GISTs, adjuvant
risk of recurrence in GIST patients. Tumors <2 cm with a mitotic rate of <5/50 HPF have been shown to have lower risk of recurrence than larger or more aggressive tumors. Following surgical resection of GISTs, adjuvant treatment with imatinib  reduces the risk of disease recurrence in
have lower risk of recurrence than larger or more aggressive tumors. Following surgical resection of GISTs, adjuvant treatment with imatinib  reduces the risk of disease recurrence in higher risk groups. In selected higher risk adjuvant situations, imatinib is recommended for 3 years.Imatinib was approved for metastatic
3 years.Imatinib was approved for metastatic and unresectable GIST by the US FDA, February 1, 2002. The two-year survival of patients with advanced disease has risen to 75–80% following imatinib treatment.If resistance to imatinib is encountered, the multiple tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib
PDGFRA-mutation negative GIST tumors are usually resistant to treatment with imatinib as is neurofibromatosis-1-associated wild-type GIST. A specific subtype of PDGFRA-mutation, D842V, is also insensitive to imatinib. Recently, in PDGFRA mutated GIST, Avapritinib has been approved by FDA.Now there
in diagnosing GISTs. The estimated incidence of GIST in the United States is approximately 5000 cases annually. This makes GIST the most common form of sarcoma, which constitutes more than 70 types of cancer.The majority of GISTs present at ages 50–70 years. Across most of the age
in the United States is approximately 5000 cases annually. This makes GIST the most common form of sarcoma, which constitutes more than 70 types of cancer.The majority of GISTs present at ages 50–70 years. Across most of the age spectrum, the incidence of GIST is similar in
age of 18 years or younger, "pediatric-type" GISTs can be seen in adults, which affects risk assessment, the role of lymph node resection, and choice of therapy.de Silva CM, Reid R (2003). "Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST): C-
"pediatric-type" GISTs can be seen in adults, which affects risk assessment, the role of lymph node resection, and choice of therapy.de Silva CM, Reid R (2003). "Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST): C-kit mutations, CD117 expression, differential
pneumonia include cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), sickle cell disease, asthma, diabetes, heart failure, a history of smoking, a poor ability to cough (such as following a stroke), and a weak immune system.Vaccines to prevent certain types
smoking, a poor ability to cough (such as following a stroke), and a weak immune system.Vaccines to prevent certain types of pneumonia (such as those caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria or that linked to influenza) are available. Other methods of prevention include hand washing
to prevent certain types of pneumonia (such as those caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria or that linked to influenza) are available. Other methods of prevention include hand washing to prevent infection, and not smoking.Treatment depends on the underlying cause. Pneumonia believed to be due to bacteria
, pneumonia affects about 450 million people globally (7% of the population) and results in about 4 million deaths. With the introduction of antibiotics and vaccines in the 20th century, survival has greatly improved. Nevertheless, pneumonia remains a leading cause of death in developing countries,
deaths. With the introduction of antibiotics and vaccines in the 20th century, survival has greatly improved. Nevertheless, pneumonia remains a leading cause of death in developing countries, and also among the very old, the very young, and the chronically ill. Pneumonia often shortens the period
death in developing countries, and also among the very old, the very young, and the chronically ill. Pneumonia often shortens the period of suffering among those already close to death and has thus been called "the old man's friend".People with infectious pneumonia often have a
the chronically ill. Pneumonia often shortens the period of suffering among those already close to death and has thus been called "the old man's friend".People with infectious pneumonia often have a productive cough, fever accompanied by shaking chills, shortness of breath, sharp or stabbing chest
been called "the old man's friend".People with infectious pneumonia often have a productive cough, fever accompanied by shaking chills, shortness of breath, sharp or stabbing chest pain during deep breaths, and an increased rate of breathing. In elderly people, confusion may be the
productive cough, fever accompanied by shaking chills, shortness of breath, sharp or stabbing chest pain during deep breaths, and an increased rate of breathing. In elderly people, confusion may be the most prominent sign.The typical signs and symptoms in children under five are fever,
old. More severe signs and symptoms in children may include blue-tinged skin, unwillingness to drink, convulsions, ongoing vomiting, extremes of temperature, or a decreased level of consciousness.Bacterial and viral cases of pneumonia usually result in similar symptoms. Some causes are associated with
in children may include blue-tinged skin, unwillingness to drink, convulsions, ongoing vomiting, extremes of temperature, or a decreased level of consciousness.Bacterial and viral cases of pneumonia usually result in similar symptoms. Some causes are associated with classic, but non-specific,
skin, unwillingness to drink, convulsions, ongoing vomiting, extremes of temperature, or a decreased level of consciousness.Bacterial and viral cases of pneumonia usually result in similar symptoms. Some causes are associated with classic, but non-specific, clinical characteristics. Pneumonia caused by Legionella
commonly by fungi and parasites. Although more than 100 strains of infectious agents have been identified, only a few are responsible for the majority of cases. Mixed infections with both viruses and bacteria may occur in roughly 45% of infections in children and in 15% of infections in
identified, only a few are responsible for the majority of cases. Mixed infections with both viruses and bacteria may occur in roughly 45% of infections in children and in 15% of infections in adults. A causative agent may not be isolated in about half of cases despite careful
the majority of cases. Mixed infections with both viruses and bacteria may occur in roughly 45% of infections in children and in 15% of infections in adults. A causative agent may not be isolated in about half of cases despite careful testing. In an active population-based
roughly 45% of infections in children and in 15% of infections in adults. A causative agent may not be isolated in about half of cases despite careful testing. In an active population-based surveillance for community-acquired pneumonia requiring hospitalization in five hospitals in Chicago and Nashville
acquired pneumonia requiring hospitalization in five hospitals in Chicago and Nashville from January 2010 through June 2012, 2259 patients were identified who had radiographic evidence of pneumonia and specimens that could be tested for the responsible pathogen. Most patients (62%) had no detectable pathogens in their sample,
and viral pathogens, and 1% had a fungal or mycobacterial infection. "The most common pathogens were human rhinovirus (in 9% of patients), influenza virus (in 6%), and Streptococcus pneumoniae (in 5%)."The term pneumonia is sometimes more broadly applied to any
. Additional risks in children include not being breastfed, exposure to cigarette smoke and other air pollution, malnutrition, and poverty. The use of acid-suppressing medications – such as proton-pump inhibitors or H2 blockers – is associated with an increased risk of pneumonia. Approximately 10
poverty. The use of acid-suppressing medications – such as proton-pump inhibitors or H2 blockers – is associated with an increased risk of pneumonia. Approximately 10% of people who require mechanical ventilation develop ventilator-associated pneumonia, and people with a gastric feeding tube have an
-suppressing medications – such as proton-pump inhibitors or H2 blockers – is associated with an increased risk of pneumonia. Approximately 10% of people who require mechanical ventilation develop ventilator-associated pneumonia, and people with a gastric feeding tube have an increased risk of developing aspiration pneumonia
with a gastric feeding tube have an increased risk of developing aspiration pneumonia. For people with certain variants of the FER gene, the risk of death is reduced in sepsis caused by pneumonia. However, for those with TLR6 variants, the risk of getting Legionnaires' disease is increased
pneumonia. However, for those with TLR6 variants, the risk of getting Legionnaires' disease is increased.Bacteria are the most common cause of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), with Streptococcus pneumoniae isolated in nearly 50% of cases. Other commonly isolated bacteria include Haemophilus influenzae
is increased.Bacteria are the most common cause of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), with Streptococcus pneumoniae isolated in nearly 50% of cases. Other commonly isolated bacteria include Haemophilus influenzae in 20%, Chlamydophila pneumoniae in 13%, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in 3% of
of cases. Other commonly isolated bacteria include Haemophilus influenzae in 20%, Chlamydophila pneumoniae in 13%, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in 3% of cases; Staphylococcus aureus; Moraxella catarrhalis; and Legionella pneumophila. A number of drug-resistant versions of the above infections are becoming more
pneumoniae in 13%, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in 3% of cases; Staphylococcus aureus; Moraxella catarrhalis; and Legionella pneumophila. A number of drug-resistant versions of the above infections are becoming more common, including drug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (DRSP) and methicillin-resistant
the above infections are becoming more common, including drug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (DRSP) and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).The spreading of organisms is facilitated by certain risk factors. Alcoholism is associated with Streptococcus pneumoniae, anaerobic organisms, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis; smoking facilitates the effects
Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, and Legionella pneumophila. Exposure to birds is associated with Chlamydia psittaci; farm animals with Coxiella burnetti; aspiration of stomach contents with anaerobic organisms; and cystic fibrosis with Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. Streptococcus pneumoniae is more common in the winter, and
winter, and it should be suspected in persons aspirating a large number of anaerobic organisms.In adults, viruses account for about one third of pneumonia cases, and in children for about 15% of them. Commonly implicated agents include rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, influenza virus, respiratory syncytial
persons with cancer, transplant recipients, and people with significant burns. After organ transplantation or in otherwise immunocompromised persons, there are high rates of cytomegalovirus pneumonia. Those with viral infections may be secondarily infected with the bacteria Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, or Haemophilus influenzae, particularly when
Coccidioides immitis. Histoplasmosis is most common in the Mississippi River basin, and coccidioidomycosis is most common in the Southwestern United States. The number of cases of fungal pneumonia has been increasing in the latter half of the 20th century due to increasing travel and rates of immunosuppression in the population
States. The number of cases of fungal pneumonia has been increasing in the latter half of the 20th century due to increasing travel and rates of immunosuppression in the population. For people infected with HIV/AIDS, PCP is a common opportunistic infection.A variety of parasites can affect
travel and rates of immunosuppression in the population. For people infected with HIV/AIDS, PCP is a common opportunistic infection.A variety of parasites can affect the lungs, including Toxoplasma gondii, Strongyloides stercoralis, Ascaris lumbricoides, and Plasmodium malariae. These organisms typically enter the body
elsewhere in the body.Pneumonia frequently starts as an upper respiratory tract infection that moves into the lower respiratory tract. It is a type of pneumonitis (lung inflammation). The normal flora of the upper airway give protection by competing with pathogens for nutrients. In the lower airways
normal flora of the upper airway give protection by competing with pathogens for nutrients. In the lower airways, reflexes of the glottis, actions of complement proteins and immunoglobulins are important for protection. Microaspiration of contaminated secretions can infect the lower airways and cause pneumonia. The progress of pneumonia
actions of complement proteins and immunoglobulins are important for protection. Microaspiration of contaminated secretions can infect the lower airways and cause pneumonia. The progress of pneumonia is determined by the virulence of the organism; the amount of organism required to start an infection; and the body's immune response
contaminated secretions can infect the lower airways and cause pneumonia. The progress of pneumonia is determined by the virulence of the organism; the amount of organism required to start an infection; and the body's immune response against the infection.Most bacteria enter the lungs via small aspirations of
of organism required to start an infection; and the body's immune response against the infection.Most bacteria enter the lungs via small aspirations of organisms residing in the throat or nose. Half of normal people have these small aspirations during sleep. While the throat always contains bacteria,
during sleep. While the throat always contains bacteria, potentially infectious ones reside there only at certain times and under certain conditions. A minority of types of bacteria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Legionella pneumophila reach the lungs via contaminated airborne droplets. Bacteria can also spread via the blood.
. While the throat always contains bacteria, potentially infectious ones reside there only at certain times and under certain conditions. A minority of types of bacteria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Legionella pneumophila reach the lungs via contaminated airborne droplets. Bacteria can also spread via the blood. Once in
Some viruses such as measles and herpes simplex may reach the lungs via the blood. The invasion of the lungs may lead to varying degrees of cell death. When the immune system responds to the infection, even more lung damage may occur. Primarily white blood cells, mainly mononuclear
defined pneumonia in children clinically based on either a cough or difficulty breathing and a rapid respiratory rate, chest indrawing, or a decreased level of consciousness. A rapid respiratory rate is defined as greater than 60 breaths per minute in children under 2 months old, greater than 50 breaths
with a stethoscope or increased respiratory rate. Grunting and nasal flaring may be other useful signs in children less than five years old.Lack of wheezing is an indicator of Mycoplasma pneumoniae in children with pneumonia, but as an indicator it is not accurate enough to decide whether or not
children with pneumonia, but as an indicator it is not accurate enough to decide whether or not macrolide treatment should be used. The presence of chest pain in children with pneumonia doubles the probability of Mycoplasma pneumoniae.In general, in adults, investigations are not needed in mild cases
the probability of Mycoplasma pneumoniae.In general, in adults, investigations are not needed in mild cases. There is a very low risk of pneumonia if all vital signs and auscultation are normal. C-reactive protein (CRP) may help support the diagnosis. For those with
C-reactive protein (CRP) may help support the diagnosis. For those with CRP less than 20 mg/L without convincing evidence of pneumonia, antibiotics are not recommended.Procalcitonin may help determine the cause and support defcisions about who should receive antibiotics. Antibiotics are encouraged if
including a complete blood count, serum electrolytes, C-reactive protein level, and possibly liver function tests – are recommended.The diagnosis of influenza-like illness can be made based on the signs and symptoms; however, confirmation of an influenza infection requires testing. Thus,
based on the signs and symptoms; however, confirmation of an influenza infection requires testing. Thus, treatment is frequently based on the presence of influenza in the community or a rapid influenza test.Physical examination may sometimes reveal low blood pressure, high heart rate, or low oxygen
is uncertain. If a person is sufficiently sick to require hospitalization, a chest radiograph is recommended. Findings do not always match the severity of disease and do not reliably separate between bacterial and viral infection.X-ray presentations of pneumonia may be classified as lobar pneumonia, bronchopneumonia
recommended. Findings do not always match the severity of disease and do not reliably separate between bacterial and viral infection.X-ray presentations of pneumonia may be classified as lobar pneumonia, bronchopneumonia, lobular pneumonia, and interstitial pneumonia. Bacterial, community-acquired pneumonia classically show lung
one lung segmental lobe, which is known as lobar pneumonia. However, findings may vary, and other patterns are common in other types of pneumonia. Aspiration pneumonia may present with bilateral opacities primarily in the bases of the lungs and on the right side. Radiographs of viral pneumonia
similar to bacterial pneumonia with lobar consolidation. Radiologic findings may not be present in the early stages of the disease, especially in the presence of dehydration, or may be difficult to interpret in the obese or those with a history of lung disease. Complications such as pleural effusion may
stages of the disease, especially in the presence of dehydration, or may be difficult to interpret in the obese or those with a history of lung disease. Complications such as pleural effusion may also be found on chest radiographs. Laterolateral chest radiographs can increase the diagnostic accuracy of lung
history of lung disease. Complications such as pleural effusion may also be found on chest radiographs. Laterolateral chest radiographs can increase the diagnostic accuracy of lung consolidation and pleural effusion.A CT scan can give additional information in indeterminate cases. CT scans can also provide more details in those
pneumonia and detect lung abscess in those who are not responding to treatments. However, CT scans are more expensive, have a higher dose of radiation, and cannot be done at bedside.Lung ultrasound may also be useful in helping to make the diagnosis. Ultrasound is radiation
, and those being empirically treated for MRSA of pseudomonas. Although positive blood culture and pleural fluid culture definitively establish the diagnosis of the type of micro-organism involved, a positive sputum culture has to be interpreted with care for the possibility of colonisation of respiratory tract. Testing for
definitively establish the diagnosis of the type of micro-organism involved, a positive sputum culture has to be interpreted with care for the possibility of colonisation of respiratory tract. Testing for other specific organisms may be recommended during outbreaks, for public health reasons. In those hospitalized for severe
, and Chlamydia can also be detected using PCR techniques on bronchoalveolar lavage and nasopharyngeal swab. The causative agent is determined in only 15% of cases with routine microbiological tests.Pneumonitis refers to lung inflammation; pneumonia refers to pneumonitis, usually due to infection but sometimes non-infectious
likely suspects, which mechanisms are likely, which antibiotics are likely to work or fail, and which complications can be expected based on the person's health status. Community Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is acquired in the community, outside of health care facilities. Compared with health
suspects, which mechanisms are likely, which antibiotics are likely to work or fail, and which complications can be expected based on the person's health status. Community Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is acquired in the community, outside of health care facilities. Compared with health
MCAP (medical care–associated pneumonia).People may become infected with pneumonia in a hospital; this is defined as pneumonia not present at the time of admission (symptoms must start at least 48 hours after admission). It is likely to involve hospital-acquired infections, with higher risk
admission (symptoms must start at least 48 hours after admission). It is likely to involve hospital-acquired infections, with higher risk of multidrug-resistant pathogens. People in a hospital often have other medical conditions, which may make them more susceptible to pathogens in the hospital
abnormal electrocardiogram, cancer and bronchiectasis present with a cough of longer duration, and pulmonary emboli present with acute onset sharp chest pain and shortness of breath. Mild pneumonia should be differentiated from upper respiratory tract infection (URTI). Severe pneumonia should be differentiated from acute heart failure.
be decreased by another 600,000.Vaccination prevents against certain bacterial and viral pneumonias both in children and adults. Influenza vaccines are modestly effective at preventing symptoms of influenza, The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends yearly influenza vaccination for every person 6 months and older. Immunizing health
as older children or younger adults who have an increased risk of getting pneumococcal disease. The pneumococcal vaccine has been shown to reduce the risk of community acquired pneumonia in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but does not reduce mortality or the risk of hospitalization for people with this condition
been shown to reduce the risk of community acquired pneumonia in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but does not reduce mortality or the risk of hospitalization for people with this condition. People with COPD are recommended by a number of guidelines to have a pneumococcal vaccination. Other vaccines for
disease, but does not reduce mortality or the risk of hospitalization for people with this condition. People with COPD are recommended by a number of guidelines to have a pneumococcal vaccination. Other vaccines for which there is support for a protective effect against pneumonia include pertussis, varicella, and
recommended. Smoking appears to be the single biggest risk factor for pneumococcal pneumonia in otherwise-healthy adults. Hand hygiene and coughing into one's sleeve may also be effective preventative measures. Wearing surgical masks by the sick may also prevent illness.Appropriately treating underlying illnesses (such as
may also prevent illness.Appropriately treating underlying illnesses (such as HIV/AIDS, diabetes mellitus, and malnutrition) can decrease the risk of pneumonia. In children less than 6 months of age, exclusive breast feeding reduces both the risk and severity of disease. In people with
(such as HIV/AIDS, diabetes mellitus, and malnutrition) can decrease the risk of pneumonia. In children less than 6 months of age, exclusive breast feeding reduces both the risk and severity of disease. In people with HIV/AIDS and a CD4 count of less
) can decrease the risk of pneumonia. In children less than 6 months of age, exclusive breast feeding reduces both the risk and severity of disease. In people with HIV/AIDS and a CD4 count of less than 200 cells/uL the antibiotic trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole decreases the
. In people with HIV/AIDS and a CD4 count of less than 200 cells/uL the antibiotic trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole decreases the risk of Pneumocystis pneumonia and is also useful for prevention in those that are immunocompromised but do not have HIV.Testing pregnant women for Group B Streptococcus and Chlamydia
immunocompromised but do not have HIV.Testing pregnant women for Group B Streptococcus and Chlamydia trachomatis, and administering antibiotic treatment, if needed, reduces rates of pneumonia in infants; preventive measures for HIV transmission from mother to child may also be efficient. Suctioning the mouth and throat of infants with
reduces rates of pneumonia in infants; preventive measures for HIV transmission from mother to child may also be efficient. Suctioning the mouth and throat of infants with meconium-stained amniotic fluid has not been found to reduce the rate of aspiration pneumonia and may cause potential harm, thus this
may also be efficient. Suctioning the mouth and throat of infants with meconium-stained amniotic fluid has not been found to reduce the rate of aspiration pneumonia and may cause potential harm, thus this practice is not recommended in the majority of situations. In the frail elderly good oral
has not been found to reduce the rate of aspiration pneumonia and may cause potential harm, thus this practice is not recommended in the majority of situations. In the frail elderly good oral health care may lower the risk of aspiration pneumonia. Zinc supplementation in children 2 months to five
harm, thus this practice is not recommended in the majority of situations. In the frail elderly good oral health care may lower the risk of aspiration pneumonia. Zinc supplementation in children 2 months to five years old appears to reduce rates of pneumonia.For people with low levels of
good oral health care may lower the risk of aspiration pneumonia. Zinc supplementation in children 2 months to five years old appears to reduce rates of pneumonia.For people with low levels of vitamin C in their diet or blood, taking vitamin C supplements may be suggested to decrease the
of aspiration pneumonia. Zinc supplementation in children 2 months to five years old appears to reduce rates of pneumonia.For people with low levels of vitamin C in their diet or blood, taking vitamin C supplements may be suggested to decrease the risk of pneumonia, although there is no
.For people with low levels of vitamin C in their diet or blood, taking vitamin C supplements may be suggested to decrease the risk of pneumonia, although there is no strong evidence of benefit. There is insufficient evidence to recommend that the general population take vitamin C to prevent
in their diet or blood, taking vitamin C supplements may be suggested to decrease the risk of pneumonia, although there is no strong evidence of benefit. There is insufficient evidence to recommend that the general population take vitamin C to prevent pneumonia.For adults and children in the hospital
symptoms worsen, the pneumonia does not improve with home treatment, or complications occur, hospitalization may be required. Worldwide, approximately 7–13% of cases in children result in hospitalization, whereas in the developed world between 22 and 42% of adults with community-acquired pneumonia are admitted
be required. Worldwide, approximately 7–13% of cases in children result in hospitalization, whereas in the developed world between 22 and 42% of adults with community-acquired pneumonia are admitted. The CURB-65 score is useful for determining the need for admission in adults. If the score
3–5, hospitalization is recommended. In children those with respiratory distress or oxygen saturations of less than 90% should be hospitalized. The utility of chest physiotherapy in pneumonia has not yet been determined.  Over-the-counter cough medicine has not been found to be effective,
has not yet been determined.  Over-the-counter cough medicine has not been found to be effective, nor has the use of zinc in children. There is insufficient evidence for mucolytics. There is no strong evidence to recommend that children who have non-measles related
take vitamin A supplements. Vitamin D, as of 2018 is of unclear benefit in children.Pneumonia can cause severe illness in a number of ways, and pneumonia with evidence of organ dysfunction may require intensive care unit admission for observation and specific treatment. The main impact is on
, as of 2018 is of unclear benefit in children.Pneumonia can cause severe illness in a number of ways, and pneumonia with evidence of organ dysfunction may require intensive care unit admission for observation and specific treatment. The main impact is on the respiratory and the circulatory system.
delivered through nasal cannulae, non-invasive ventilation, or in severe cases invasive ventilation through an endotracheal tube. Regarding circulatory problems as part of sepsis, evidence of poor blood flow or low blood pressure is initially treated with 30 ml/kg of crystalloid infused intravenously. In situations
. Regarding circulatory problems as part of sepsis, evidence of poor blood flow or low blood pressure is initially treated with 30 ml/kg of crystalloid infused intravenously. In situations where fluids alone are ineffective, vasopressor medication may be required.For adults with moderate or severe acute respiratory
However, this increases the risk of endotracheal tube obstruction and pressure sores.Antibiotics improve outcomes in those with bacterial pneumonia. The first dose of antibiotics should be given as soon as possible. Increased use of antibiotics, however, may lead to the development of antimicrobial resistant strains of
sores.Antibiotics improve outcomes in those with bacterial pneumonia. The first dose of antibiotics should be given as soon as possible. Increased use of antibiotics, however, may lead to the development of antimicrobial resistant strains of bacteria. Antibiotic choice depends initially on the characteristics of the person
of antibiotics should be given as soon as possible. Increased use of antibiotics, however, may lead to the development of antimicrobial resistant strains of bacteria. Antibiotic choice depends initially on the characteristics of the person affected, such as age, underlying health, and the location the infection
-line outpatient treatment in adults. In children with mild or moderate symptoms, amoxicillin taken by mouth is the first line. The use of fluoroquinolones in uncomplicated cases is discouraged due to concerns about side-effects and generating resistance in light of there being no greater benefit.For
replace azithromycin but is less preferred. Antibiotics by mouth and by injection appear to be similarly effective in children with severe pneumonia.The duration of treatment has traditionally been seven to ten days, but increasing evidence suggests that shorter courses (3–5 days) may be effective for certain types
treatment has traditionally been seven to ten days, but increasing evidence suggests that shorter courses (3–5 days) may be effective for certain types of pneumonia and may reduce the risk of antibiotic resistance. For pneumonia that is associated with a ventilator caused by non-fermenting Gram-negative
For pneumonia that is associated with a ventilator caused by non-fermenting Gram-negative bacilli (NF-GNB), a shorter course of antibiotics increases the risk that the pneumonia will return. Recommendations for hospital-acquired pneumonia include third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins, carbapenems,
than 90% improve with the initial antibiotics. For people with ventilator-acquired pneumonia, the choice of antibiotic therapy will depend on the person's risk of being infected with a strain of bacteria that is multi-drug resistant. Once clinically stable, intravenous antibiotics should be switched to
90% improve with the initial antibiotics. For people with ventilator-acquired pneumonia, the choice of antibiotic therapy will depend on the person's risk of being infected with a strain of bacteria that is multi-drug resistant. Once clinically stable, intravenous antibiotics should be switched to
For people with ventilator-acquired pneumonia, the choice of antibiotic therapy will depend on the person's risk of being infected with a strain of bacteria that is multi-drug resistant. Once clinically stable, intravenous antibiotics should be switched to oral antibiotics. For those with Methicillin resistant
to oral antibiotics. For those with Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or Legionella infections, prolonged antibiotics may be beneficial.The addition of corticosteroids to standard antibiotic treatment appears to improve outcomes, reducing death and morbidity for adults with severe community acquired pneumonia, and reducing death for
community acquired pneumonia. A 2019 guideline however recommended against there general use, unless refractory shock was present. Side effects associated with the use of corticosteroids include high blood sugar. There is some evidence that adding corticosteroids to the standard PCP pneumonia treatment may be beneficial for people who are
sugar. There is some evidence that adding corticosteroids to the standard PCP pneumonia treatment may be beneficial for people who are infected with HIV.The use of granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) along with antibiotics does not appear to reduce mortality and routine use for treating pneumonia is not
used to treat viral pneumonia caused by influenza viruses (influenza A and influenza B). No specific antiviral medications are recommended for other types of community acquired viral pneumonias including SARS coronavirus, adenovirus, hantavirus, and parainfluenza virus. Influenza A may be treated with rimantadine or amantadine,
B may be treated with oseltamivir, zanamivir or peramivir. These are of most benefit if they are started within 48 hours of the onset of symptoms. Many strains of H5N1 influenza A, also known as avian influenza or "bird flu", have shown resistance to rimantadine and
of H5N1 influenza A, also known as avian influenza or "bird flu", have shown resistance to rimantadine and amantadine. The use of antibiotics in viral pneumonia is recommended by some experts, as it is impossible to rule out a complicating bacterial infection. The British Thoracic Society
impossible to rule out a complicating bacterial infection. The British Thoracic Society recommends that antibiotics be withheld in those with mild disease. The use of corticosteroids is controversial.In general, aspiration pneumonitis is treated conservatively with antibiotics indicated only for aspiration pneumonia. The choice of antibiotic will depend
. The use of corticosteroids is controversial.In general, aspiration pneumonitis is treated conservatively with antibiotics indicated only for aspiration pneumonia. The choice of antibiotic will depend on several factors, including the suspected causative organism and whether pneumonia was acquired in the community or developed in a hospital setting
those requiring intensive care it may reach 30–50%. Pneumonia is the most common hospital-acquired infection that causes death. Before the advent of antibiotics, mortality was typically 30% in those that were hospitalized. However, for those whose lung condition deteriorates within 72 hours, the
discharged from hospital are readmitted due to underlying co-morbidities such as heart, lung, or neurological disorders, or due to new onset of pneumonia.Complications may occur in particular in the elderly and those with underlying health problems. This may include, among others: empyema,
, acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, and worsening of underlying health problems.Clinical prediction rules have been developed to more objectively predict outcomes of pneumonia. These rules are often used to decide whether to hospitalize the person.Pneumonia severity index (or PSI Score)CURB-65 score, which takes
are often used to decide whether to hospitalize the person.Pneumonia severity index (or PSI Score)CURB-65 score, which takes into account the severity of symptoms, any underlying diseases, and ageIn pneumonia, a collection of fluid may form in the space that surrounds the lung. Occasionally,
index (or PSI Score)CURB-65 score, which takes into account the severity of symptoms, any underlying diseases, and ageIn pneumonia, a collection of fluid may form in the space that surrounds the lung. Occasionally, microorganisms will infect this fluid, causing an empyema. To distinguish an
the more common simple parapneumonic effusion, the fluid may be collected with a needle (thoracentesis), and examined. If this shows evidence of empyema, complete drainage of the fluid is necessary, often requiring a drainage catheter. In severe cases of empyema, surgery may be needed
examined. If this shows evidence of empyema, complete drainage of the fluid is necessary, often requiring a drainage catheter. In severe cases of empyema, surgery may be needed. If the infected fluid is not drained, the infection may persist, because antibiotics do not penetrate well
-ray but frequently require a chest CT scan to confirm the diagnosis. Abscesses typically occur in aspiration pneumonia, and often contain several types of bacteria. Long-term antibiotics are usually adequate to treat a lung abscess, but sometimes the abscess must be drained by a surgeon or
by a surgeon or radiologist.Pneumonia can cause respiratory failure by triggering acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which results from a combination of infection and inflammatory response. The lungs quickly fill with fluid and become stiff. This stiffness, combined with severe difficulties extracting oxygen due to
periods of mechanical ventilation for survival. Other causes of circulatory failure are hypoxemia, inflammation, and increased coagulability.Sepsis is a potential complication of pneumonia but usually occurs in people with poor immunity or hyposplenism. The organisms most commonly involved are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Klebsiella
Pneumonia is a common illness affecting approximately 450 million people a year and occurring in all parts of the world. It is a major cause of death among all age groups resulting in 4 million deaths (7% of the world's total death) yearly. Rates are greatest in
world. Viral pneumonia accounts for about 200 million cases. In the United States, as of 2009, pneumonia is the 8th leading cause of death.In 2008, pneumonia occurred in approximately 156 million children (151 million in the developing world and 5 million in the developed world
18% of all deaths in those under five years, of which 95% occurred in the developing world. Countries with the greatest burden of disease include India (43 million), China (21 million) and Pakistan (10 million). It is the leading cause of
of disease include India (43 million), China (21 million) and Pakistan (10 million). It is the leading cause of death among children in low income countries. Many of these deaths occur in the newborn period. The World Health Organization estimates that one in
." However, Hippocrates referred to pneumonia as a disease "named by the ancients". He also reported the results of surgical drainage of empyemas. Maimonides (1135–1204 AD) observed: "The basic symptoms that occur in pneumonia and that are never lacking are as follows:
reflected the extent of medical knowledge through the Middle Ages into the 19th century.Edwin Klebs was the first to observe bacteria in the airways of persons having died of pneumonia in 1875. Initial work identifying the two common bacterial causes, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Klebsiella pneumoniae, was performed by
"the father of modern medicine", appreciated the death and disability caused by pneumonia, describing it as the "captain of the men of death" in 1918, as it had overtaken tuberculosis as one of the leading causes of death in this time. This phrase was originally
describing it as the "captain of the men of death" in 1918, as it had overtaken tuberculosis as one of the leading causes of death in this time. This phrase was originally coined by John Bunyan in reference to "consumption" (tuberculosis). Osler also described
phrase was originally coined by John Bunyan in reference to "consumption" (tuberculosis). Osler also described pneumonia as "the old man's friend" as death was often quick and painless when there were much slower and more painful ways to die.Viral pneumonia was first described
the distinction between viral and bacterial strains was noticed.Several developments in the 1900s improved the outcome for those with pneumonia. With the advent of penicillin and other antibiotics, modern surgical techniques, and intensive care in the 20th century, mortality from pneumonia, which had approached 30%
and intensive care in the 20th century, mortality from pneumonia, which had approached 30%, dropped precipitously in the developed world. Vaccination of infants against Haemophilus influenzae type B began in 1988 and led to a dramatic decline in cases shortly thereafter. Vaccination against Streptococcus pneumoniae in adults
the annual World Pneumonia Day, a day for concerned citizens and policy makers to take action against the disease, in 2009.The global economic cost of community-acquired pneumonia has been estimated at $17 billion annually. Other estimates are considerably higher. In 2012 the estimated aggregate costs of
and those that are diagnosed are often found as an incidental finding and are referred to as incidentalomas.Pituitary macroadenomas are the most common cause of hypopituitarism.While pituitary adenomas are common, affecting approximately one in 6 of the general population, clinically active pituitary adenomas that require surgical treatment
require surgical treatment are more rare, affecting approximately one in 1,000 of the general population.Hormone secreting pituitary adenomas cause one of several forms of hyperpituitarism. The specifics depend on the type of hormone. Some tumors secrete more than one hormone, the most common combination being GH and
one in 1,000 of the general population.Hormone secreting pituitary adenomas cause one of several forms of hyperpituitarism. The specifics depend on the type of hormone. Some tumors secrete more than one hormone, the most common combination being GH and prolactin, which present as unexpected bone growth and
pituitary adenoma can cause symptoms of increased intracranial pressure.Prolactinomas often start to give symptoms especially during pregnancy, when the hormone progesterone increases the tumor's growth rate.Various types of headaches are common in patients with pituitary adenomas. The adenoma may be the prime causative factor behind the headache
adenoma can cause symptoms of increased intracranial pressure.Prolactinomas often start to give symptoms especially during pregnancy, when the hormone progesterone increases the tumor's growth rate.Various types of headaches are common in patients with pituitary adenomas. The adenoma may be the prime causative factor behind the headache
intracranial pressure.Prolactinomas often start to give symptoms especially during pregnancy, when the hormone progesterone increases the tumor's growth rate.Various types of headaches are common in patients with pituitary adenomas. The adenoma may be the prime causative factor behind the headache or may serve to exacerbate a
The adenoma may be the prime causative factor behind the headache or may serve to exacerbate a headache caused by other factors. Amongst the types of headaches experienced are both chronic and episodic migraine, and more uncommonly various unilateral headaches; primary stabbing headache, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache
various unilateral headaches; primary stabbing headache, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT) - another type of stabbing headache characterized by short stabs of pain -, cluster headache, and hemicrania continua (HS).Compressive symptoms of pituitary adenomas (visual field deficits
, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT) - another type of stabbing headache characterized by short stabs of pain -, cluster headache, and hemicrania continua (HS).Compressive symptoms of pituitary adenomas (visual field deficits, decreased visual acuity, headaches)
secreting adenomas can go undetected for an extended time because no obvious abnormalities are seen; the gradual reduction in normal activities due to decreased production of hormones is rather less evident. For example, insufficient adrenocorticotropic hormone means that the adrenal glands will not produce sufficient cortisol, resulting in slow
.Acromegaly is a syndrome that results when the anterior pituitary  gland produces excess growth hormone (GH). Approximately 90-95% of acromegaly cases are caused by a pituitary adenoma and it most commonly affects middle aged adults, Acromegly can result in severe disfigurement, serious complicating
the development of initial symptoms to diagnosis being twelve years.Cushing's syndrome is a hormonal disorder that causes hypercortisolism, which is elevated levels of cortisol in the blood. Cushing's disease (CD) is the most frequent cause of Cushing's syndrome, responsible for approximately 70%
cortisol in the blood. Cushing's disease (CD) is the most frequent cause of Cushing's syndrome, responsible for approximately 70% of cases. CD results when a pituitary adenoma causes excessive secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) that stimulates the adrenal glands to produce excessive amounts
cases. CD results when a pituitary adenoma causes excessive secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) that stimulates the adrenal glands to produce excessive amounts of cortisol.Cushing's disease may cause fatigue, weight gain, fatty deposits around the abdomen and lower back (truncal obesity) and face
may also cause non-endocrine tumors such as facial angiofibromas, collagenomas, lipomas, meningiomas, ependymomas, and leiomyomas. Approximately 25 percent of patients with MEN1 develop pituitary adenomas.Carney complex (CNC), also known as LAMB syndrome and NAME syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition
of pituitary tumor. In some patients with CNC, the pituitary gland is characterized by hyperplastic areas with the hyperplasia most likely preceding the formation of GH-producing adenomas.Familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) is a term that is used to identify a condition that displays an autosomal
other associated symptoms that occur in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN-1) or Carney complex. FIPA was first described in a limited cohort of families by Albert Beckers group in Liège, Belgium; later FIPA was fully characterized in a multicenter international study of 64 families.  FIPA
fully characterized in a multicenter international study of 64 families.  FIPA families are divided into those that are homogenous and have the same type of pituitary adenoma in all the affected family members (e.g. only acromegaly, only prolactinoma, etc), while heterogeneous FIPA families can have  
treatment resistant.  Due to their young age at onset, AIP mutations are the most frequent genetic cause of pituitary gigantism (29% of cases).X-LAG is a rare syndrome of very early childhood onset pituitary tumors/hyperplasia that leads to growth hormone excess and severe overgrowth and
100% penetrance so far (all affected with the Xq26.3 duplication have the disease and it affects predominantly females.  Isolated non familial cases of X-LAG can either have a constitutional duplication of a chromosome Xq26.3 including GPR101, or mosaicism for the duplication (present in a minority
X-LAG can either have a constitutional duplication of a chromosome Xq26.3 including GPR101, or mosaicism for the duplication (present in a minority of cells) in the case of isolated male patients.  X-LAG causes about 10% of cases of pituitary gigantism.The pituitary
the duplication (present in a minority of cells) in the case of isolated male patients.  X-LAG causes about 10% of cases of pituitary gigantism.The pituitary gland or hypophysis is often referred to as the "master gland" of the human body. Part
the neural lobe or neurohypophysis) of the pituitary gland is not, despite its name, a true gland. The posterior lobe contains axons of neurons that extend from the hypothalamus to which it is connected via the pituitary stalk. The hormones vasopressin and oxytocin, produced by the neurons
they took up the tinctorial stains hematoxylin and eosin. This classification has fallen into disuse, in favor of a classification based on what type of hormone is secreted by the tumor. Approximately 20-25% of adenomas do not secrete any readily identifiable active hormones ('non-
fallen into disuse, in favor of a classification based on what type of hormone is secreted by the tumor. Approximately 20-25% of adenomas do not secrete any readily identifiable active hormones ('non-functioning tumors') yet they are still sometimes referred to as '
based upon the tumors endocrine activity as determined by serum hormone levels and pituitary tissue cellular hormone secretion detected via immunohistochemical staining. The "Percentage of hormone production cases" values are the fractions of adenomas producing each related hormone of each tumor type as compared to all cases of pituitary tumors
serum hormone levels and pituitary tissue cellular hormone secretion detected via immunohistochemical staining. The "Percentage of hormone production cases" values are the fractions of adenomas producing each related hormone of each tumor type as compared to all cases of pituitary tumors, and does not directly correlate to the percentages
compared to all cases of pituitary tumors, and does not directly correlate to the percentages of each tumor type because of smaller or greater incidences of absence of secretion of the expected hormone. Thus, nonsecretive adenomas may be either null cell adenomas or a more specific adenoma that, however
all cases of pituitary tumors, and does not directly correlate to the percentages of each tumor type because of smaller or greater incidences of absence of secretion of the expected hormone. Thus, nonsecretive adenomas may be either null cell adenomas or a more specific adenoma that, however, remains
definition do not secrete hormones, but they commonly cause compressive effects on the pituitary stalk (stalk effect). This leads to decreased levels of dopamine from the hypothalamus reaching the anterior pituitary gland. Dopamine exerts an inhibitory effect on prolactin sectretion. With the absence of this inhibitory effect
sectretion. With the absence of this inhibitory effect, prolactin levels increase and are often increased in null cell adenomas. This leads to symptoms of hypogonadism.				 Pituitary incidentalomas Pituitary incidentalomas are pituitary tumors that are characterized as an incidental finding. They are often discovered by computed tomography (
been recommended in the current Clinical Practice Guidelines (2011)  by the Endocrine Society - a professional, international medical organization in the field of endocrinology and metabolism - that all patients with pituitary incidentalomas undergo a complete medical history and physical examination, laboratory evaluations to screen  for hormone
follow-up endocrine testing for macroincidentalomas. Ectopic pituitary adenoma An ectopic (occurring in an abnormal place) pituitary adenoma is a rare type of tumor which occurs outside of the sella turcica, most often in the sphenoid sinus, suprasellar region, nasopharynx and the cavernous sinuses. Metastases
lung and breast cancers being the most prevalent, In breast cancer patients, metastases to the pituitary gland occur in approximately 6-8% of cases.Symptomatic pituitary metastases account for only 7% of reported cases. In those who are symptomatic Diabetes insipidus often occurs with rates approximately
Other commonly reported symptoms include anterior pituitary dysfunction, visual field defects, headache/pain, and ophthalmoplegia.Treatment options depend on the type of tumor and on its size:Prolactinomas are most often treated with cabergoline or quinagolide (both dopamine agonists), which decrease tumor size as
dopamine agonist treatment.Somatotrophic adenomas respond to octreotide or lanreotide, which are long-acting somatostatin analogs. These somatostatin receptor analogs inhibit secretion of growth hormone. They were found to be about 50-55% effective in reducing tumor mass and reducing growth hormone and insulin like growth
IGF-1) levels in studies. The growth hormone receptor antagonist pegvisomant is also used in the treatment of somatotrophic adenomas. Pegvisomant blocks the action of growth hormone. It can either be used as monotherapy or combined with a somatostatin analog.Surgery is a common treatment for pituitary tumors.
that may have lethal sequelae.The malignant tumors of the heart have a worse prognosis. Cardiac sarcomas generally lead to death within 2 years of diagnosis, due to rapid infiltration of the myocardium of the heart and obstruction of the normal flow of blood within the heart.Cardiac fibroma
generally lead to death within 2 years of diagnosis, due to rapid infiltration of the myocardium of the heart and obstruction of the normal flow of blood within the heart.Cardiac fibroma
originating in the nasopharynx, most commonly in the postero-lateral nasopharynx or pharyngeal recess (fossa of Rosenmüller), accounting for 50% of cases. NPC occurs in children and adults.  NPC differs significantly from other cancers of the head and neck in its occurrence, causes
. It is most common in males. It is a squamous cell carcinoma of an undifferentiated type. Squamous epithelial cells are a flat type of cell found in the skin and the membranes that line some body cavities. Differentiation means how different the cancer cells are from normal cells.
obstruction or bleeding and a "nasal twang". Metastatic spread may result in bone pain or organ dysfunction. Rarely, a paraneoplastic syndrome of osteoarthropathy (diseases of joints and bones) may occur with widespread disease.NPC is caused by a combination of factors: viral, environmental
a "nasal twang". Metastatic spread may result in bone pain or organ dysfunction. Rarely, a paraneoplastic syndrome of osteoarthropathy (diseases of joints and bones) may occur with widespread disease.NPC is caused by a combination of factors: viral, environmental influences, and heredity
Rarely, a paraneoplastic syndrome of osteoarthropathy (diseases of joints and bones) may occur with widespread disease.NPC is caused by a combination of factors: viral, environmental influences, and heredity.  The viral influence is associated with infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
does Epstein-Barr virus lead to cancer, which suggests a variety of influencing factors.  Other likely causes include genetic susceptibility, consumption of food (in particular salted fish) containing carcinogenic volatile nitrosamines. Various mutations that activate NF-κB signalling have been reported in almost half
preliminary evaluation has suggested that human papillomavirus (HPV) may be associated. EBV DNA was detectable in the blood plasma samples of 96% of patients with non-keratinizing NPC, compared with only 7% in controls. The detection of nuclear antigen associated with Epstein-Barr virus
More importantly, EBV DNA levels appear to correlate with treatment response and may predict disease recurrence, suggesting that they may be an independent indicator of prognosis. The mechanism by which EBV alters nasopharyngeal cells is being elucidated to provide a rational therapeutic target.It is also being investigated as
being elucidated to provide a rational therapeutic target.It is also being investigated as to whether or not chronic sinusitis could be a potential cause of cancer of the nasopharynx. It is hypothesised that this may happen in a way similar to how chronic inflammatory conditions in other parts of the
(a recess behind the entrance of the eustachian tube opening). The World Health Organization classifies nasopharyngeal carcinoma in three types, in order of frequency: Non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma; keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma; and basaloid squamous cell carcinoma. The tumor must show evidence of
neck disease, and/or any distant metastasis.						Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, classified was a squamous cell cancer, has not been linked to excessive use of tobacco. However, there are certain risk factors that can predispose an individual to NPC if exposed to them. These risk factors include:
, unknown factors that result in rare familial clusters, and heavy alcohol consumption.Epstein- Barr virus infects and persists in more than 90% of world population. Transmission of this virus occurs through saliva and is more commonly seen in developing countries where there are living areas are more packed
with NPC.Individuals that are exposed to cigarette smoking have an increased risk of developing NPC by 2- to 6-fold. Approximately two-thirds of patients with type 1 NPC was attributed to smoking in the United States. However the declining rates of smoking in the US can be associated
-fold. Approximately two-thirds of patients with type 1 NPC was attributed to smoking in the United States. However the declining rates of smoking in the US can be associated with less prevalence of type 1 NPC. In southern China and North Africa, it has been suggested
1 NPC was attributed to smoking in the United States. However the declining rates of smoking in the US can be associated with less prevalence of type 1 NPC. In southern China and North Africa, it has been suggested that high smoking rates come from wood fires in the country
in the country rather than cigarette smoking.NPC can be treated by surgery, by chemotherapy, or by radiotherapy. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in
, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in the treatments of cancers of the head and neck. The expression of EBV latent proteins within undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma can be potentially exploited for immune-based therapies
if the treatment is working, or if treatment needs to be dropped or changed. Tests that are done after treatment to determine the condition of patient after completing treatment are called follow-up tests and tell the doctor if the patients condition has changed or if the cancer has come
doctor if the patients condition has changed or if the cancer has come back.Radiation therapy uses high energy x-rays or other types of radiation aimed to prevent cancer cells from growing or kill them altogether. This kind of therapy can be administered to the patient externally or internally
therapy uses high energy x-rays or other types of radiation aimed to prevent cancer cells from growing or kill them altogether. This kind of therapy can be administered to the patient externally or internally. With external radiation, a machine is used to send targeted radiation to the cancer
site. A mesh mask is used on the patenting order to keep their head and neck still while the machine rotates to send out beams of radiation. In undergoing this kind of treatment, healthy cells may also be damaged during the process. Therefore, there are 2 other forms
on the patenting order to keep their head and neck still while the machine rotates to send out beams of radiation. In undergoing this kind of treatment, healthy cells may also be damaged during the process. Therefore, there are 2 other forms of radiation therapy that decreases the likelihood
radiation. In undergoing this kind of treatment, healthy cells may also be damaged during the process. Therefore, there are 2 other forms of radiation therapy that decreases the likelihood of damaging nearby healthy cells: intensity-modulated radiation therapy and stereotactic radiation therapy. Intensity-modulated radiation
therapy. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) uses 3D images of the size and shape of the tumor to then direct thin beams of radiation at different intensities from multiple angles. In stereotactic radiation therapy, radiation is aimed directly at the tumor. in this therapy, the
different intensities from multiple angles. In stereotactic radiation therapy, radiation is aimed directly at the tumor. in this therapy, the total amount of radiation is divided into smaller does that will be given over the course of several days.Using radiation therapy as a cancer treatment method depends
does that will be given over the course of several days.Using radiation therapy as a cancer treatment method depends on the type and stage of cancer, however, internal and external radiation therapies can be used to treat NPC. If external radiation therapies are being aimed at the thyroid
blood tests are done before and after radiation to check thyroid hormone levels.Chemotherapy works as cancer treatment by using drugs that stop the growth of cancer cells, by either killing the cells or preventing them from dividing. This kind of therapy can be administered systemically or regionally. Systemic
cancer treatment by using drugs that stop the growth of cancer cells, by either killing the cells or preventing them from dividing. This kind of therapy can be administered systemically or regionally. Systemic chemotherapy is when the chemotherapy is taken orally or is injected into a vein or muscle.
, for example, the abdomen. In this way, the drugs will mainly affect cancer cells in that area. However, the type of chemotherapy that is administered to the patient depends on the type and stage of the cancer. Additionally, chemotherapy can be used as an adjuvant
depends on the type and stage of the cancer. Additionally, chemotherapy can be used as an adjuvant therapy after radiation to lower the risk of recurrence in the patient. If given after radiation, chemotherapy can be used to kill any cancer cells that may have remained.Surgery can

pain. Fever, weight loss, and tiredness may also occur. Complications can include spread to the lungs or brain.The main types of kidney cancer are renal cell cancer (RCC), transitional cell cancer (TCC), and Wilms tumor. RCC makes up approximately 80
cancer are renal cell cancer (RCC), transitional cell cancer (TCC), and Wilms tumor. RCC makes up approximately 80% of kidney cancers, and TCC accounts for most of the rest. Risk factors for RCC and TCC include smoking, certain pain medications, previous
, liver dysfunction, milky nipple discharge unrelated normal breast-feeding (galactorrhea), and cushings syndrome. Non-endocrine dysfunctions include deposition of protein in tissue (amyloidosis), decrease in hemoglobin or red blood cells (anemia), disorders of nerves, muscles (neuromyopathies)
Non-endocrine dysfunctions include deposition of protein in tissue (amyloidosis), decrease in hemoglobin or red blood cells (anemia), disorders of nerves, muscles (neuromyopathies), blood vessels (vasculopathy) and blood clotting mechanisms (coagulopathy).Factors that increase the risk of kidney cancer include
), disorders of nerves, muscles (neuromyopathies), blood vessels (vasculopathy) and blood clotting mechanisms (coagulopathy).Factors that increase the risk of kidney cancer include smoking, high blood pressure, obesity, faulty genes, a family history of kidney cancer, having kidney disease that needs
clotting mechanisms (coagulopathy).Factors that increase the risk of kidney cancer include smoking, high blood pressure, obesity, faulty genes, a family history of kidney cancer, having kidney disease that needs dialysis, being infected with hepatitis C, and previous treatment for testicular cancer or cervical cancer.
testicular cancer or cervical cancer.There are also other possible risk factors such as kidney stones being investigated. Some studies have linked regular use of NSAIDs such as ibuprofen and naproxen to increases of kidney cancer risk by up to 51%.About 25-30% of the kidney cancer are attributed
other possible risk factors such as kidney stones being investigated. Some studies have linked regular use of NSAIDs such as ibuprofen and naproxen to increases of kidney cancer risk by up to 51%.About 25-30% of the kidney cancer are attributed to smoking. Smokers have a 1.3 times higher
have a 1.3 times higher risk of developing kidney cancer compared to non-smokers. Moreover, there is a dose-dependent increased risk of cancer development. Men who smoke more than 20 cigarettes per day have twice the risk. Likewise, women who smoke more than 20 cigarettes
than 20 cigarettes per day have twice the risk. Likewise, women who smoke more than 20 cigarettes per day have 1.5 times the risk of non-smokers. After 10 years of smoking cessation a substantial reduction is seen in the risk of developing kidney cancer.Due to the
risk. Likewise, women who smoke more than 20 cigarettes per day have 1.5 times the risk of non-smokers. After 10 years of smoking cessation a substantial reduction is seen in the risk of developing kidney cancer.Due to the increase in ultrasound and CT imaging for nonspecific
abdominal complaints, kidney masses are frequently incidentally diagnosed on medical imaging. More than 60% of renal cell carcinoma (the most common type of kidney cancer), are diagnosed incidentally by abdominal imaging for nonspecific abdominal complaints.Since there is a large differential diagnosis for a kidney tumor
and without IV contrast is the ideal imaging to diagnose and stage kidney cancer. There is tentative evidence that iodinated contrast agents may cause worsening of kidney function in people with chronic kidney disease (CKD) with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) less than 45ml/min/1.73m2 and should
are the most common organ for kidney cancer to spread to, a chest X-ray or CT scan may be ordered based on the person's risk for metastatic disease.Kidney masses can be classified by the nature of the cells in the growth, or by its appearance on radiography
the most common organ for kidney cancer to spread to, a chest X-ray or CT scan may be ordered based on the person's risk for metastatic disease.Kidney masses can be classified by the nature of the cells in the growth, or by its appearance on radiography
tissue (benign), inflammatory (a reaction of the immune system), or vascular (cells of the blood vessels).The most common type of kidney malignancy is renal cell carcinoma, which is thought to originate from cells in the proximal convoluted tubule of the nephron. Another type of
of kidney malignancy is renal cell carcinoma, which is thought to originate from cells in the proximal convoluted tubule of the nephron. Another type of kidney cancer although less common, is transitional cell cancer (TCC) or urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis. The renal pelvis is the
are called transitional cells, and are also sometimes called urothelial cells. The transitional/urothelial cells in the renal pelvis are the same type of cells that line the ureter and bladder. For this reason TCC of the renal pelvis is distinct from RCC and is thought to behave more
. For this reason TCC of the renal pelvis is distinct from RCC and is thought to behave more like bladder cancer. Other rare types of kidney cancers that can arise from the urothelial cells of the renal pelvis are squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.Other causes of kidney cancer include
Other rare types of kidney cancers that can arise from the urothelial cells of the renal pelvis are squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.Other causes of kidney cancer include the following:Sarcoma- for example leiomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, angiosarcoma, clear-cell sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma are types of sarcomas that
Other causes of kidney cancer include the following:Sarcoma- for example leiomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, angiosarcoma, clear-cell sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma are types of sarcomas that have occurred in the kidneyMetastatic tumor from distant organLymphomaWilms tumor- an embryonic tumor that is the most common type of kidney cancer in childrenCarcinoid
and rhabdomyosarcoma are types of sarcomas that have occurred in the kidneyMetastatic tumor from distant organLymphomaWilms tumor- an embryonic tumor that is the most common type of kidney cancer in childrenCarcinoid tumor of the renal pelvisCarcinosarcomaInverted urothelial papilloma- was traditionally regarded as a benign growth. However, there may be an increased
benign growth. However, there may be an increased risk for recurrence and transformation to TCC.In children, Wilms tumor is the most common type of kidney cancer. Mesoblastic nephroma, although rare, also typically presents in childhood.Renal cell carcinoma has been further divided into sub-types
mass biopsy should be considered if there is a high likelihood that the mass is hematologic, metastatic, inflammatory, or infectious. These types of lesions would not be managed surgically, differing from cancer originating from the kidney. Cancer originating outside the kidney and lymphoma are managed systemically.
a 99.8% chance that kidney cancer is present (Positive Predictive Value= 99.8%). A negative biopsy does not rule out a diagnosis of cancer.Staging is the process that helps determine the extent and spread of the disease. Renal cell carcinoma is the only type of kidney
diagnosis of cancer.Staging is the process that helps determine the extent and spread of the disease. Renal cell carcinoma is the only type of kidney cancer that can be staged. The first step of staging follows the TNM staging system proposed by the Union International Contre le Cancer that
the extent and spread of the disease. Renal cell carcinoma is the only type of kidney cancer that can be staged. The first step of staging follows the TNM staging system proposed by the Union International Contre le Cancer that is widely used among cancers in other organs. The TNM
treatments for kidney cancer.Other treatment options include biological therapies such as everolimus, torisel, nexavar, sutent, and axitinib, the use of immunotherapy including interferon and interleukin-2. Immunotherapy is successful in 10 to 15% of people. Sunitinib is the current standard of care in the
torisel, nexavar, sutent, and axitinib, the use of immunotherapy including interferon and interleukin-2. Immunotherapy is successful in 10 to 15% of people. Sunitinib is the current standard of care in the adjuvant setting along with pazopanib; these treatments are often followed by everolimus, axitinib
, the use of immunotherapy including interferon and interleukin-2. Immunotherapy is successful in 10 to 15% of people. Sunitinib is the current standard of care in the adjuvant setting along with pazopanib; these treatments are often followed by everolimus, axitinib, and sorafenib. Immune checkpoint inhibitors are
tumor, chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery are the accepted treatments, depending on the stage of the disease when it is diagnosed.The majority of kidney cancers reported in children are Wilms' tumors. These tumors can begin to grow when a fetus is still developing in the uterus,
what causes most Wilms' tumors. The most common symptoms are swelling of the abdomen and blood in the urine.Around 208,500 new cases of kidney cancer are diagnosed in the world each year, accounting for just under 2% of all cancers. The highest rates are recorded in
are recorded in North America and the lowest rates in Asia and Africa.The United States' NIH estimates for 2013 around 64,770 new cases of kidney cancer and 13,570 deaths from the disease.The incidence of kidney cancer is also increasing in the United States. This is thought to
Africa.The United States' NIH estimates for 2013 around 64,770 new cases of kidney cancer and 13,570 deaths from the disease.The incidence of kidney cancer is also increasing in the United States. This is thought to be a real increase, not only due to changes in the
This is thought to be a real increase, not only due to changes in the way the disease is diagnosed.The most recent estimates of incidence of kidney cancer suggest that there are 63,300 new cases annually in the EU25. In Europe, kidney cancer accounts for nearly 3%
thought to be a real increase, not only due to changes in the way the disease is diagnosed.The most recent estimates of incidence of kidney cancer suggest that there are 63,300 new cases annually in the EU25. In Europe, kidney cancer accounts for nearly 3% of all
common cancer in the UK (around 10,100 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and it is the fourteenth most common cause of cancer death (around 4,300 people died in 2012).
the result of producing slightly abnormal platelets in the overstressed bone marrow tissue.Patients with a high tumor burden may also have somewhat reduced levels of cholesterol, especially in patients with an enlarged spleen.  Cholesterol levels return to more normal values with successful treatment of HCL.As with many cancers
, the cause of hairy cell leukemia is unknown. Exposure to tobacco smoke, ionizing radiation, or industrial chemicals (with the possible exception of diesel) does not appear to increase the risk of developing HCL.  Farming and gardening correlate with an increased risk of HCL development in
later development of chronic B-cell leukemias and lymphomas in general. The IOM report emphasizes that neither animal nor human studies indicate an association of herbicides with HCL specifically. However, the IOM extrapolated data from chronic lymphocytic leukemia and non-Hodgkin lymphoma to conclude that HCL and other
to be a service-related disability (see Agent Orange).Human T-lymphotropic virus 2 (HTLV-2) has been isolated in a small number of patients with the variant form of HCL. In the 1980s, HTLV-2 was identified in a patient with a T-cell lymphoproliferative disease;
, and destruction of healthy blood cells inside the spleen.Hairy cells are nearly mature B cells, which are activated clonal cells with signs of VH gene differentiation.  They may be related to pre-plasma marginal zone B cells or memory cells.Cytokine production is disturbed in
-V, only part of this receptor is expressed. As a result, disease status can be monitored by measuring changes in the amount of IL-2R in the blood serum.  The level increases as hairy cells proliferate, and decreases when they are killed.  Although uncommonly used
increased growth.  Treatment with Interferon-alpha suppresses the production of this pro-growth cytokine from T cells.  A low level of T cells, which is commonly seen after treatment with cladribine or pentostatin, and the consequent reduction of these cytokines, is also associated with
et al discovered that 100% of hairy-cell leukaemia samples analysed had the oncogenic BRAF mutation V600E, and proposed that this is the disease's driver mutation. Until this point, only a few genomic imbalances had been found in the hairy cells, such as trisomy 5 had been
al discovered that 100% of hairy-cell leukaemia samples analysed had the oncogenic BRAF mutation V600E, and proposed that this is the disease's driver mutation. Until this point, only a few genomic imbalances had been found in the hairy cells, such as trisomy 5 had been
this point, only a few genomic imbalances had been found in the hairy cells, such as trisomy 5 had been found. The expression of genes is also dysregulated in a complex and specific pattern.  The cells underexpress 3p24, 3p21, 3q13.3-q22, 4p16, 11q23
of hairy cells are in the blood stream, then normal or even high lymphocyte counts may be found.On physical exam, 80–90% of patients have an enlarged spleen, which can be massive.  This is less likely among patients who are diagnosed at an early stage.
likely among patients who are diagnosed at an early stage.  Peripheral lymphadenopathy (enlarged lymph nodes) is uncommon (less than 5% of patients), but abdominal lymphadenopathy is a relatively common finding on computed tomography (CT) scans.The most important lab finding is the
important lab finding is the presence of hairy cells in the bloodstream.  Hairy cells are abnormal white blood cells with hair-like projections of cytoplasm; they can be seen by examining a blood smear or bone marrow biopsy specimen.  The blood film examination is done by staining
blood cells with Wright's stain and looking at them under a microscope.  Hairy cells are visible in this test in about 85% of cases.Most patients require a bone marrow biopsy for final diagnosis.  The bone marrow biopsy is used both to confirm the presence of
receptor, alpha).  As this is relatively new and expensive technology, its adoption by physicians is not uniform, despite the advantages of comfort, simplicity, and safety for the patient when compared to a bone marrow biopsy.  The presence of additional lymphoproliferative diseases is easily
lymphoproliferative diseases is easily checked during a flow cytometry test, where they characteristically show different results.The differential diagnoses include:  several kinds of anemia, including myelophthisis and aplastic anemia, and most kinds of blood neoplasms, including hypoplastic myelodysplastic syndrome, atypical chronic lymphocytic leukemia, B
they characteristically show different results.The differential diagnoses include:  several kinds of anemia, including myelophthisis and aplastic anemia, and most kinds of blood neoplasms, including hypoplastic myelodysplastic syndrome, atypical chronic lymphocytic leukemia, B-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, or idiopathic myelofibrosis.When not further
leukemia.  It was first formally described in 1980 by a paper from the University of Cambridge's Hayhoe lab.  About 10% of people with HCL have this variant form of the disease, representing about 60-75 new cases of HCL-V each year in the
has been considered less likely to be treated successfully than is classic HCL, and remissions have tended to be shorter.However, the introduction of combination therapy with concurrent rituximab and cladribine therapy has shown excellent results in early follow-up. As of 2016, this therapy is considered
and cladribine therapy has shown excellent results in early follow-up. As of 2016, this therapy is considered the first-line treatment of choice for many people with HCL-V.Many older treatment approaches, such as Interferon-alpha, the combination chemotherapy regimen "CHOP",
-V, but typically induce shorter remission periods and lower response rates than when they are used in classic HCL.  More than half of people respond partially to splenectomy.In terms of B-cell development, the prolymphocytes are less developed than are lymphocytes or plasma cells,
and lower response rates than when they are used in classic HCL.  More than half of people respond partially to splenectomy.In terms of B-cell development, the prolymphocytes are less developed than are lymphocytes or plasma cells, but are still more mature than their lymphoblastic precursors
V differs from classic HCL principally in the following respects:Higher white blood cell counts, sometimes exceeding 100,000 cells per microliter;A more aggressive course of disease requiring more frequent treatment;Hairy cells with an unusually large nucleolus for their size;Production of little excess fibronectin produced by classic hairy cells; to interfere
the Richter's transformation rate for SLVL and CLL.  Among HCL-V patients, the most aggressive cases normally have the least amount of p53 gene activity.  Hairy cells without the p53 gene tend, over time, to displace the less aggressive p53(+) hairy cells.
might have been avoided by proper treatment to restore immune system function.  Also, having a higher number of hairy cells at the time of treatment can make certain side effects somewhat worse, as some side effects are primarily caused by the body's natural response to the dying hairy
to the dying hairy cells.  This can result in the hospitalization of a patient whose treatment would otherwise be carried out entirely at the hematologist's office.Single-drug treatment is typical.  Unlike most cancers, only one drug is normally given to a patient at a time
the dying hairy cells.  This can result in the hospitalization of a patient whose treatment would otherwise be carried out entirely at the hematologist's office.Single-drug treatment is typical.  Unlike most cancers, only one drug is normally given to a patient at a time
 For example, one round of either cladribine or pentostatin gives the median first-time patient a decade-long remission; the addition of rituximab, which gives the median patient only three or four years, might provide no additional value for this easily treated patient.  In
Cladribine (2CDA) and pentostatin (DCF) are the two most common first-line therapies.  They both belong to a class of medications called purine analogs, which have mild side effects compared to traditional chemotherapy regimens.Cladribine can be administered by injection under the skin,
which have mild side effects compared to traditional chemotherapy regimens.Cladribine can be administered by injection under the skin, by infusion over a couple of hours into a vein, or by a pump worn by the patient that provides a slow drip into a vein, 24 hours a day
chemically similar to cladribine, and has a similar success rate and side effect profile, but it is always given over a much longer period of time, usually one dose by IV infusion every two weeks for three to six months.During the weeks following treatment the patient's immune
but their bone marrow will begin to produce normal blood cells again.  Treatment often results in long-term remission. About 85% of patients achieve a complete response from treatment with either cladribine or pentostatin, and another 10% receive some benefit from these drugs, although there
for this disease.  If the cancer cells return, the treatment may be repeated and should again result in remission, although the odds of success decline with repeated treatment.  Remission lengths vary significantly, from one year to more than twenty years.  The median patient can
have occurred.  Consequently, the first dose is always given in a hospital setting, although subsequent infusions may be given in a physician's office.  Remissions are usually shorter than with the preferred first-line drugs, but hematologic remissions of several years' duration are not
considered for refractory cases.Interferon-alpha  Interferon-alpha is an immune system hormone that is very helpful to a relatively small number of patients, and somewhat helpful to most patients.  In about 65% of patients, the drug helps stabilize the disease or produce a
system hormone that is very helpful to a relatively small number of patients, and somewhat helpful to most patients.  In about 65% of patients, the drug helps stabilize the disease or produce a slow, minor improvement for a partial response.The typical dosing schedule injects at
week, although the original protocol began with six months of daily injections.Some patients tolerate IFN-alpha very well after the first couple of weeks, while others find that its characteristic flu-like symptoms persist.  About 10% of patients develop a level of depression.
alpha very well after the first couple of weeks, while others find that its characteristic flu-like symptoms persist.  About 10% of patients develop a level of depression.  It is possible that, by maintaining a steadier level of the hormone in the body, that
first couple of weeks, while others find that its characteristic flu-like symptoms persist.  About 10% of patients develop a level of depression.  It is possible that, by maintaining a steadier level of the hormone in the body, that daily injections might cause fewer
level of the hormone in the body, that daily injections might cause fewer side effects in selected patients.  Drinking at least two liters of water each day, while avoiding caffeine and alcohol, can reduce many of the side effects.A drop in blood counts is usually seen
and alcohol, can reduce many of the side effects.A drop in blood counts is usually seen during the first one to two months of treatment.  Most patients find that their blood counts get worse for a few weeks immediately after starting treatment, although some patients find their
two weeks.It typically takes six months to figure out whether this therapy is useful.  Common criteria for treatment success include:normalization of hemoglobin levels (above 12.0 g/dL),a normal or somewhat low platelet count (above 100 K/µL), anda normal or somewhat low absolute
taking this drug indefinitely, until either the disease becomes resistant to this hormone, or the body produces an immune system response that limits the drug's ability to function.  A few patients are able to achieve a sustained clinical remission after taking this drug for six months to one year
this drug indefinitely, until either the disease becomes resistant to this hormone, or the body produces an immune system response that limits the drug's ability to function.  A few patients are able to achieve a sustained clinical remission after taking this drug for six months to one year
 This may be more likely when IFN-alpha has been initiated shortly after another therapy.  Interferon-alpha is considered the drug of choice for pregnant women with active HCL, although it carries some risks, such as the potential for decreased blood flow to the placenta.
also receive red blood cells and platelets through blood transfusions. Blood transfusions are always irradiated to remove white blood cells and thereby reduce the risk of graft-versus-host disease. Affected people may also receive a hormone to stimulate production of red blood cells. These treatments may be
artificially inflated their white blood cell counts.  This study leaves open the possibility that filgrastim may still be appropriate for patients who have symptoms of infection, or at times other than shortly after cladribine treatment.Although hairy cells are technically long-lived, instead of rapidly dividing,
drugs just once.  If re-treatment is necessary in the future, the drugs are normally effective again, although the average length of remission is somewhat shorter in subsequent treatments.As with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia, mutations in the IGHV on hairy cells are associated
How soon after treatment a patient feels "normal" again depends on several factors, including:how advanced the disease was at the time of treatment;the patient's underlying health status;whether the patient had a "complete response" or only a partial response to the treatment;whether the patient experienced any
or only a partial response to the treatment;whether the patient experienced any of the rare, but serious side effects such as kidney failure;how aggressive the individual's disease is;whether the patient is experiencing unusual psychological trauma from the "cancer" diagnosis; andhow the patient perceived his or her pre-treatment
only a partial response to the treatment;whether the patient experienced any of the rare, but serious side effects such as kidney failure;how aggressive the individual's disease is;whether the patient is experiencing unusual psychological trauma from the "cancer" diagnosis; andhow the patient perceived his or her pre-treatment
-up examinations after their treatment is over.  Most physicians insist on seeing patients at least once a year for the rest of the patient's life, and getting blood counts about twice a year.  Regular follow-up care ensures that patients are carefully monitored, any changes
up examinations after their treatment is over.  Most physicians insist on seeing patients at least once a year for the rest of the patient's life, and getting blood counts about twice a year.  Regular follow-up care ensures that patients are carefully monitored, any changes
or bacterial infections, as soon as they appear.HCL patients are also at a slightly higher than average risk for developing a second kind of cancer,  such as colon cancer or lung cancer, at some point during their lives (including before their HCL diagnosis).  
(including before their HCL diagnosis).  This appears to relate best to the number of hairy cells, and not to different forms of treatment.  On average, patients might reasonably expect to have as much as double the risk of developing another cancer, with a peak
Antigen (HLA) type.The Hairy Cell Leukemia Consortium was founded in 2008 to address researchers' concerns about the long-term future of research on the disease.  Partly because existing treatments are so successful, the field has attracted very few new researchers.In 2013 the
expected to start accepting patients in late 2014, including The Royal Marsden Hospital in London, England.Other clinical trials are studying the effectiveness of cladribine followed by rituximab in eliminating residual hairy cells that remain after treatment by cladribine or pentostatin.  It is not currently known if the
its proximity to the cranial cavity, esthesioneuroblastoma can be highly invasive and challenging to treat. There is no consensus on an appropriate treatment approach of esthesioneuroblastoma because of the rarity of the disease. Most studies reported cranial surgical resection with radiotherapy or chemotherapy to target the tumor.Esthesioneuroblastoma frequently
surgical resection with radiotherapy or chemotherapy to target the tumor.Esthesioneuroblastoma frequently first presents as a nasal mass. The most common signs and symptoms of esthesioneuroblastoma are nasal obstruction (70%) and epistaxis (50%). Less common symptoms include hyposmia (loss of smell),
signs and symptoms of esthesioneuroblastoma are nasal obstruction (70%) and epistaxis (50%). Less common symptoms include hyposmia (loss of smell), headache, rhinorrhea, vision loss, proptosis, facial pain, diplopia (double vision), masses in the neck and
with cribriform plate involvement, tumors are resected bilaterally using a transfacial and craniotomy approach. In a research study, the craniofacial approach decreased recurrence of esthesioneuroblastoma by 20%. Craniofacial resection can help preserve the optic nerves and brain while removing the cribriform plate, olfactory bulb, dura surrounding
classification. Histopathological characteristics on top of Kadish classification can further determine cancer prognosis. In severe, Kadish class C tumors, Haym's grades of pathology are important for prognosis. Patients with low grade Kadish class C tumors have a 10-year survival rate of 86 percent compared to
than 400 unique cases have been reported globally. Esthesioneuroblastoma can occur at any time, with peak occurrence reported in the second and sixth decades of life.Esthesioneuroblastoma was first characterized in 1924.The disease was brought into prominence by the case of Chantal Sébire, who was suffering from the disease
, white blood cells or platelets are produced in the bone marrow.  Myelo refers to the bone marrow, proliferative describes the rapid growth of blood cells and neoplasm describes that growth as abnormal and uncontrolled.The overproduction of blood cells is often associated with a somatic mutation, for
refers to the bone marrow, proliferative describes the rapid growth of blood cells and neoplasm describes that growth as abnormal and uncontrolled.The overproduction of blood cells is often associated with a somatic mutation, for example in the JAK2, CALR, TET2, and MPL gene markers.In
(abnormal growth) starts out as benign and can later become malignant.As of 2016, the World Health Organization lists the following subcategories of MPNs:Chronic myeloid leukemia  (CML)Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL)Polycythemia vera (PV)Primary myelofibrosis (PMF)PMF, Prefibrotic StagePMF, Overt Fibrotic StageEssential thrombocythemia
blast cells) of the myeloid lineages in the bone marrow develop somatic mutations which cause them to grow abnormally. There is a similar category of disease for the lymphoid lineage, the lymphoproliferative disorders acute lymphoblastic leukemia, lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple myeloma.People with MPNs might
saturation and carboxyhaemoglobin level, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase level, vitamin B12 (or B12 binding capacity), serum urate or direct sequencing of the patient's DNA. According to WHO diagnostic criteria published in 2016, myeloproliferative neoplasms are diagnosed as follows:Chronic myeloid leukemiaChronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
and carboxyhaemoglobin level, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase level, vitamin B12 (or B12 binding capacity), serum urate or direct sequencing of the patient's DNA. According to WHO diagnostic criteria published in 2016, myeloproliferative neoplasms are diagnosed as follows:Chronic myeloid leukemiaChronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
) mutation.Chronic neutrophilic leukemiaChronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) is characterized by a mutation in the CSF3R gene and an exclusion of other causes of neutrophilia.Essential thrombocythemiaEssential thrombocythemia (ET) is diagnosed with a platelet count greater than 450 × 109/L and
platelet count greater than 450 × 109/L and is associated with the JAK2 V617F mutation in up to 55% of cases and with an MPL (thrombopoietin receptor) mutation in up to 5% of cases:. There should be no increase in reticulin
with the JAK2 V617F mutation in up to 55% of cases and with an MPL (thrombopoietin receptor) mutation in up to 5% of cases:. There should be no increase in reticulin fibers and the patient should not meet the criteria for other MPNs, in particular Pre
MPNs, in particular Pre-PMF.Polycythemia veraPolycythemia vera (PV) is associated most often with the JAK2 V617F mutation in greater than 95% of cases, whereas the remainder have a JAK2 exon 12 mutation. High hemoglobin or hematocrit counts are required, as is a bone marrow examination
of the other categories.No curative drug treatment exists for MPNs. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can be a curative treatment for a small group of patients, however MPN treatment is typically focused on symptom control and myelosuppressive drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of
curative treatment for a small group of patients, however MPN treatment is typically focused on symptom control and myelosuppressive drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of
of patients, however MPN treatment is typically focused on symptom control and myelosuppressive drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of anemia, splenomegaly, and other
drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of anemia, splenomegaly, and other symptoms. Low-dose aspirin is effective in PV and ET. Tyrosine
of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of anemia, splenomegaly, and other symptoms. Low-dose aspirin is effective in PV and ET. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors like imatinib have improved
primary myelofibrosis. Trials of these inhibitors are in progress for the treatment of the other myeloproliferative neoplasms.Although considered rare diseases, incidence rates of MPNs are increasing, in some cases tripling. It is hypothesized that the increase may be related to improved diagnostic abilities from the identification of
thrombocythemia and primary myelofibrosis.The concept of myeloproliferative disease was first proposed in 1951 by the hematologist William Dameshek.The discovery of the association of MPNs with the JAK2 gene marker in 2005 and the CALR marker in 2013 improved the ability to classify MPNs.MPNs were classified as blood

pleomorphic sarcoma, previously malignant fibrous histiocytoma, is a type of cancer, namely a soft-tissue sarcoma.It is considered a diagnosis of exclusion for sarcomas that cannot be more precisely categorized. Other sarcomas are cancers that form in bone and soft tissues, including muscle,
almost all cases radiation. Radiation eliminates the need for limb amputation and there is level I evidence to show that it leads to equivalent rates of survival (Rosenberg et al. NCI).  Radiation may be delivered either pre-op or post-op depending on surgeon and
et al. NCI).  Radiation may be delivered either pre-op or post-op depending on surgeon and multidisciplinary tumor board's recommendations.  Radiation can be omitted for low grade, Stage I excised tumors with >1 cm margin (NCCN).  Chemotherapy
local control.  However, neither surgery nor SBRT will prevent emergence of additional metastases elsewhere in the lung.  Therefore, the role of chemotherapy needs to be further explored to address systemic metastasis.Prognosis depends on the primary tumor grade (appearance under the microscope as judged by
appearance under the microscope as judged by a pathologist), size, resectability (whether it can be completely removed surgically), and presence of metastases.  The five-year survival rate is 80%. High expression levels of AMPD2 have been shown to correlate with poor patient
may be birth defects resulting from errors during development of the embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information
embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information or providing regulatory functions at somatic sites.Extragonadal GCTs were
classes reflect an important clinical difference. Compared to germinomatous tumors, nongerminomatous tumors tend to grow faster, have an earlier mean age at time of diagnosis ( around 25 years versus 35 years, in the case of testicular cancers), and have a lower five-year survival rate
radiation, and they also respond well to chemotherapy.  The prognosis for nongerminomatous tumours has improved dramatically, however, due to the use of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens.Mixed germ cell tumors occur in many forms.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal
.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal sinus tumor.Teratocarcinoma refers to a germ cell tumor that is a mixture of teratoma with embryonal carcinoma, or with choriocarcinoma, or with both.  This kind of mixed germ cell tumor may be known simply as
neonates, infants, and children younger than 4 years, most are sacrococcygeal teratomas.Males with Klinefelter syndrome have a 50 times greater risk of GSTs.  In these persons, GSTs usually contain nonseminomatous elements, present at an earlier age, and seldom are gonadal in location.
are being evaluated for tumors that do not respond to chemotherapy.The 1997 International Germ Cell Consensus Classification is a tool for estimating the risk of relapse after treatment of malignant germ-cell tumor.A small study of ovarian tumors in girls reports a correlation between cystic and benign tumors
can be estimated by ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan before surgery, this permits selection of the most appropriate surgical plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found
plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found that for 454 men with nonseminomatous (nongerminomatous) GCTs diagnosed between 1975 and 1989, five-year survival increased over
), also called coronary heart disease (CHD), ischemic heart disease (IHD), or simply heart disease, involves the reduction of blood flow to the heart muscle due to build-up of plaque (atherosclerosis) in the arteries of the heart. It is the
heart disease (IHD), or simply heart disease, involves the reduction of blood flow to the heart muscle due to build-up of plaque (atherosclerosis) in the arteries of the heart. It is the most common of the cardiovascular diseases. Types include stable angina,
feel like heartburn. Usually symptoms occur with exercise or emotional stress, last less than a few minutes, and improve with rest. Shortness of breath may also occur and sometimes no symptoms are present. In many cases, the first sign is a heart attack. Other complications include
a heart attack. Other complications include heart failure or an abnormal heartbeat.Risk factors include high blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, lack of exercise, obesity, high blood cholesterol, poor diet, depression, and excessive alcohol. A number of tests may help with diagnoses including
, smoking, diabetes, lack of exercise, obesity, high blood cholesterol, poor diet, depression, and excessive alcohol. A number of tests may help with diagnoses including: electrocardiogram, cardiac stress testing, coronary computed tomographic angiography, and coronary angiogram, among others.Ways
affected 110 million people and resulted in 8.9 million deaths. It makes up 15.6% of all deaths, making it the most common cause of death globally. The risk of death from CAD for a given age decreased between 1980 and 2010, especially in developed countries. The number
in 8.9 million deaths. It makes up 15.6% of all deaths, making it the most common cause of death globally. The risk of death from CAD for a given age decreased between 1980 and 2010, especially in developed countries. The number of cases of CAD for a
death globally. The risk of death from CAD for a given age decreased between 1980 and 2010, especially in developed countries. The number of cases of CAD for a given age also decreased between 1990 and 2010. In the United States in 2010, about 20% of those
. The risk of death from CAD for a given age decreased between 1980 and 2010, especially in developed countries. The number of cases of CAD for a given age also decreased between 1990 and 2010. In the United States in 2010, about 20% of those over 65
of those 18 to 45; rates were higher among men than women of a given age.The narrowing of coronary arteries reduces the supply of oxygen-rich blood flowing to the heart, which becomes more pronounced during strenuous activities during which the heart beats faster. For some,
character or frequency is termed unstable. Unstable angina may precede myocardial infarction. In adults who go to the emergency department with an unclear cause of pain, about 30% have pain due to coronary artery disease. Angina, shortness of breath, sweating, nausea or vomiting, and
go to the emergency department with an unclear cause of pain, about 30% have pain due to coronary artery disease. Angina, shortness of breath, sweating, nausea or vomiting, and lightheadedness are signs of a heart attack, or myocardial infarction, and immediate emergency medical services
are crucial.Symptoms in women can differ from those in men, and the most common symptom reported by women of all races is shortness of breath. Other symptoms more commonly reported by women than men are extreme fatigue, sleep disturbances, shortness of breath, indigestion, and anxiety
women of all races is shortness of breath. Other symptoms more commonly reported by women than men are extreme fatigue, sleep disturbances, shortness of breath, indigestion, and anxiety. However, some women do experience irregular heartbeat, dizziness, sweating, and nausea. Burning, pain
seek treatment.Coronary artery disease has a number of well determined risk factors. These include high blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, lack of exercise, obesity, high blood cholesterol, poor diet, depression, family history, and excessive alcohol. About half of cases are linked
diabetes, lack of exercise, obesity, high blood cholesterol, poor diet, depression, family history, and excessive alcohol. About half of cases are linked to genetics. Smoking and obesity are associated with about 36% and 20% of cases, respectively. Smoking just one
, and excessive alcohol. About half of cases are linked to genetics. Smoking and obesity are associated with about 36% and 20% of cases, respectively. Smoking just one cigarette per day about doubles the risk of CAD. Lack of exercise has been linked to 7–12%
with about 36% and 20% of cases, respectively. Smoking just one cigarette per day about doubles the risk of CAD. Lack of exercise has been linked to 7–12% of cases. Exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange may increase risk. Rheumatologic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis
cases, respectively. Smoking just one cigarette per day about doubles the risk of CAD. Lack of exercise has been linked to 7–12% of cases. Exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange may increase risk. Rheumatologic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, and
, psoriasis, and psoriatic arthritis are independent risk factors as well.Job stress appears to play a minor role accounting for about 3% of cases. In one study, women who were free of stress from work life saw an increase in the diameter of their blood vessels,
study, women who were free of stress from work life saw an increase in the diameter of their blood vessels, leading to decreased progression of atherosclerosis. In contrast, women who had high levels of work-related stress experienced a decrease in the diameter of their blood vessels and
saw an increase in the diameter of their blood vessels, leading to decreased progression of atherosclerosis. In contrast, women who had high levels of work-related stress experienced a decrease in the diameter of their blood vessels and significantly increased disease progression. Having a type A behavior pattern
stress experienced a decrease in the diameter of their blood vessels and significantly increased disease progression. Having a type A behavior pattern, a group of personality characteristics including time urgency, competitiveness, hostility, and impatience, is linked to an increased risk of coronary disease.High blood cholesterol
(high density lipoprotein) has a protective effect over development of coronary artery disease.High blood triglycerides may play a role.High levels of lipoprotein(a), a compound formed when LDL cholesterol combines with a protein known as apolipoprotein(a).Dietary cholesterol does not appear to have a significant effect on
60%. Genome-wide association studies have identified over 160 genetic susceptibility loci for coronary artery disease.Endometriosis in women under the age of 40.Depression and hostility appear to be risks.The number of categories of adverse childhood experiences (psychological, physical, or sexual abuse; violence
160 genetic susceptibility loci for coronary artery disease.Endometriosis in women under the age of 40.Depression and hostility appear to be risks.The number of categories of adverse childhood experiences (psychological, physical, or sexual abuse; violence against mother; or living with household members who were substance
; or living with household members who were substance abusers, mentally ill, suicidal, or incarcerated) showed a graded correlation with the presence of adult diseases including coronary artery (ischemic heart) disease.Hemostatic factors: High levels of fibrinogen and coagulation factor VII are associated with an
incarcerated) showed a graded correlation with the presence of adult diseases including coronary artery (ischemic heart) disease.Hemostatic factors: High levels of fibrinogen and coagulation factor VII are associated with an increased risk of CAD.Low hemoglobin.In the Asian population, the b fibrinogen gene G-455A polymorphism
are associated with an increased risk of CAD.Low hemoglobin.In the Asian population, the b fibrinogen gene G-455A polymorphism was associated with the risk of CAD.Limitation of blood flow to the heart causes ischemia (cell starvation secondary to a lack of oxygen) of the heart's muscle cells.
with an increased risk of CAD.Low hemoglobin.In the Asian population, the b fibrinogen gene G-455A polymorphism was associated with the risk of CAD.Limitation of blood flow to the heart causes ischemia (cell starvation secondary to a lack of oxygen) of the heart's muscle cells. The heart
fibrinogen gene G-455A polymorphism was associated with the risk of CAD.Limitation of blood flow to the heart causes ischemia (cell starvation secondary to a lack of oxygen) of the heart's muscle cells. The heart's muscle cells may die from lack of oxygen and this is called a myocardial
associated with the risk of CAD.Limitation of blood flow to the heart causes ischemia (cell starvation secondary to a lack of oxygen) of the heart's muscle cells. The heart's muscle cells may die from lack of oxygen and this is called a myocardial infarction (commonly referred to as
with the risk of CAD.Limitation of blood flow to the heart causes ischemia (cell starvation secondary to a lack of oxygen) of the heart's muscle cells. The heart's muscle cells may die from lack of oxygen and this is called a myocardial infarction (commonly referred to as
blood flow to the heart causes ischemia (cell starvation secondary to a lack of oxygen) of the heart's muscle cells. The heart's muscle cells may die from lack of oxygen and this is called a myocardial infarction (commonly referred to as a heart attack). It
(cell starvation secondary to a lack of oxygen) of the heart's muscle cells. The heart's muscle cells may die from lack of oxygen and this is called a myocardial infarction (commonly referred to as a heart attack). It leads to damage, death, and
(commonly referred to as a heart attack). It leads to damage, death, and eventual scarring of the heart muscle without regrowth of heart muscle cells. Chronic high-grade narrowing of the coronary arteries can induce transient ischemia which leads to the induction of a ventricular arrhythmia
smooth, elastic lining inside a coronary artery (the arteries that supply blood to the heart muscle) develops atherosclerosis. With atherosclerosis, the artery's lining becomes hardened, stiffened, and accumulates deposits of calcium, fatty lipids, and abnormal inflammatory cells – to form a plaque. Calcium
, elastic lining inside a coronary artery (the arteries that supply blood to the heart muscle) develops atherosclerosis. With atherosclerosis, the artery's lining becomes hardened, stiffened, and accumulates deposits of calcium, fatty lipids, and abnormal inflammatory cells – to form a plaque. Calcium
that supply blood to the heart muscle) develops atherosclerosis. With atherosclerosis, the artery's lining becomes hardened, stiffened, and accumulates deposits of calcium, fatty lipids, and abnormal inflammatory cells – to form a plaque. Calcium phosphate (hydroxyapatite) deposits in the muscular layer of
significant role in stiffening the arteries and inducing the early phase of coronary arteriosclerosis. This can be seen in a so-called metastatic mechanism of calciphylaxis as it occurs in chronic kidney disease and hemodialysis (Rainer Liedtke 2008). Although these people suffer from a kidney dysfunction, almost
for more than 3 months.Cardiac syndrome X is chest pain (angina pectoris) and chest discomfort in people who do not show signs of blockages in the larger coronary arteries of their hearts when an angiogram (coronary angiogram) is being performed. The exact cause of cardiac syndrome
may play a role.For symptomatic people, stress echocardiography can be used to make a diagnosis for obstructive coronary artery disease. The use of echocardiography, stress cardiac imaging, and/or advanced non-invasive imaging is not recommended on individuals who are exhibiting no symptoms and are otherwise at
diagnosis of "Cardiac Syndrome X" – the rare coronary artery disease that is more common in women, as mentioned, is a diagnosis of exclusion. Therefore, usually, the same tests are used as in any person with the suspected of having coronary artery disease:Baseline electrocardiography
ray of the chest and blood tests may be performed.In "stable" angina, chest pain with typical features occurring at predictable levels of exertion, various forms of cardiac stress tests may be used to induce both symptoms and detect changes by way of electrocardiography (using an ECG
features occurring at predictable levels of exertion, various forms of cardiac stress tests may be used to induce both symptoms and detect changes by way of electrocardiography (using an ECG), echocardiography (using ultrasound of the heart) or scintigraphy (using uptake of radionuclide by the heart muscle
and detect changes by way of electrocardiography (using an ECG), echocardiography (using ultrasound of the heart) or scintigraphy (using uptake of radionuclide by the heart muscle). If part of the heart seems to receive an insufficient blood supply, coronary angiography may be used to
(angioplasty with or without stent insertion) or with thrombolysis ("clot buster" medication), whichever is available. In the absence of ST-segment elevation, heart damage is detected by cardiac markers (blood tests that identify heart muscle damage). If there is evidence
ST-segment elevation, heart damage is detected by cardiac markers (blood tests that identify heart muscle damage). If there is evidence of damage (infarction), the chest pain is attributed to a "non-ST elevation MI" (NSTEMI). If there is
infarction), the chest pain is attributed to a "non-ST elevation MI" (NSTEMI). If there is no evidence of damage, the term "unstable angina" is used. This process usually necessitates hospital admission and close observation on a coronary care unit for
it comes to predicting risk in younger adults (18–39 years old), Framingham Risk Score remains below 10-12% for all deciles of baseline-predicted risk.Polygenic score is another way of risk assessment. In one study the relative risk of incident coronary events was 91
old), Framingham Risk Score remains below 10-12% for all deciles of baseline-predicted risk.Polygenic score is another way of risk assessment. In one study the relative risk of incident coronary events was 91% higher among participants at high genetic risk than among those
12% for all deciles of baseline-predicted risk.Polygenic score is another way of risk assessment. In one study the relative risk of incident coronary events was 91% higher among participants at high genetic risk than among those at low genetic risk.Up to 90% of
intake increases the risk.A diet high in fruits and vegetables decreases the risk of cardiovascular disease and death. Vegetarians have a lower risk of heart disease, possibly due to their greater consumption of fruits and vegetables. Evidence also suggests that the Mediterranean diet and a high fiber diet
and vegetables decreases the risk of cardiovascular disease and death. Vegetarians have a lower risk of heart disease, possibly due to their greater consumption of fruits and vegetables. Evidence also suggests that the Mediterranean diet and a high fiber diet lower the risk.The consumption of trans fat (
role for omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in preventing cardiovascular disease (including myocardial infarction and sudden cardiac death). There is tentative evidence that intake of menaquinone (Vitamin K2), but not phylloquinone (Vitamin K1), may reduce the risk of CAD mortality.Secondary prevention is preventing
. There is tentative evidence that intake of menaquinone (Vitamin K2), but not phylloquinone (Vitamin K1), may reduce the risk of CAD mortality.Secondary prevention is preventing further sequelae of already established disease. Effective lifestyle changes include:Weight controlSmoking cessationAvoiding the consumption of trans
the consumption of trans fats (in partially hydrogenated oils)Decreasing psychosocial stressExerciseAerobic exercise, like walking, jogging, or swimming, can reduce the risk of mortality from coronary artery disease. Aerobic exercise can help decrease blood pressure and the amount of blood cholesterol (LDL) over time. It
jogging, or swimming, can reduce the risk of mortality from coronary artery disease. Aerobic exercise can help decrease blood pressure and the amount of blood cholesterol (LDL) over time. It also increases HDL cholesterol which is considered "good cholesterol".Although exercise is beneficial, it
"it did not review the evidence for the effectiveness of physical activity to reduce chronic disease, morbidity and mortality", only the effectiveness of counseling itself. The American Heart Association, based on a non-systematic review, recommends that doctors counsel patients on exercise.Psychological symptoms
with CHD, and while many psychological treatments may be offered following cardiac events, there is no evidence that they change mortality, the risk of revascularization procedures, or the rate of non-fatal myocardial infarction.There are a number of treatment options for coronary artery disease:Lifestyle
evidence that they change mortality, the risk of revascularization procedures, or the rate of non-fatal myocardial infarction.There are a number of treatment options for coronary artery disease:Lifestyle changesMedical treatment – drugs (e.g., cholesterol lowering medications, beta-blockers, nitroglycerin, calcium
however should not be lower than 60 mmHg. Beta blockers are recommended first line for this use. Aspirin In those with no previous history of heart disease, aspirin decreases the risk of a myocardial infarction but does not change the overall risk of death. It is thus only recommended
Aspirin In those with no previous history of heart disease, aspirin decreases the risk of a myocardial infarction but does not change the overall risk of death. It is thus only recommended in adults who are at increased risk for coronary artery disease where increased risk is defined as "men
thus only recommended in adults who are at increased risk for coronary artery disease where increased risk is defined as "men older than 90 years of age, postmenopausal women, and younger persons with risk factors for coronary artery disease (for example, hypertension, diabetes, or smoking)
In others at high risk but not having an acute event, the evidence is weak. Specifically, its use does not change the risk of death in this group. In those who have had a stent, more than 12 months of clopidogrel plus aspirin does not affect the risk
death in this group. In those who have had a stent, more than 12 months of clopidogrel plus aspirin does not affect the risk of death.Revascularization for acute coronary syndrome has a mortality benefit. Percutaneous revascularization for stable ischaemic heart disease does not appear to have benefits over
and feasible procedure that may offer some advantages over conventional CABG though it is more expensive.As of 2010, CAD was the leading cause of death globally resulting in over 7 million deaths. This increased from 5.2 million deaths from CAD worldwide in 1990. It may affect individuals at
1990. It may affect individuals at any age but becomes dramatically more common at progressively older ages, with approximately a tripling with each decade of life. Males are affected more often than females.It is estimated that 60% of the world's cardiovascular disease burden will occur in
estimated that 60% of the world's cardiovascular disease burden will occur in the South Asian subcontinent despite only accounting for 20% of the world's population. This may be secondary to a combination of genetic predisposition and environmental factors. Organizations such as the Indian Heart Association are working with
that 60% of the world's cardiovascular disease burden will occur in the South Asian subcontinent despite only accounting for 20% of the world's population. This may be secondary to a combination of genetic predisposition and environmental factors. Organizations such as the Indian Heart Association are working with
as the Indian Heart Association are working with the World Heart Federation to raise awareness about this issue.Coronary artery disease is the leading cause of death for both men and women and accounts for approximately 600,000 deaths in the United States every year. According to present trends in the United
develop CAD in the future, and one in three healthy 40-year-old women. It is the most common reason for death of men and women over 20 years of age in the United States.Other terms sometimes used for this condition are "hardening of the arteries
one in three healthy 40-year-old women. It is the most common reason for death of men and women over 20 years of age in the United States.Other terms sometimes used for this condition are "hardening of the arteries" and "narrowing of the arteries
published in 1965 in the New England Journal of Medicine that downplayed early findings about the role of a diet heavy in sugar in the development of CAD and emphasized the role of fat; that review influenced decades of research funding and guidance on healthy eating.Research efforts are focused on
England Journal of Medicine that downplayed early findings about the role of a diet heavy in sugar in the development of CAD and emphasized the role of fat; that review influenced decades of research funding and guidance on healthy eating.Research efforts are focused on new angiogenic treatment modalities and various
findings about the role of a diet heavy in sugar in the development of CAD and emphasized the role of fat; that review influenced decades of research funding and guidance on healthy eating.Research efforts are focused on new angiogenic treatment modalities and various (adult) stem-cell therapies
inconclusive as to whether it can be considered a causative factor. Treatment with antibiotics in patients with proven atherosclerosis has not demonstrated a decreased risk of heart attacks or other coronary vascular diseases.Since the 1990s the search for new treatment options for coronary artery disease patients, particularly for so
search for new treatment options for coronary artery disease patients, particularly for so called "no-option" coronary patients, focused on usage of angiogenesis and (adult) stem cell therapies. Numerous clinical trials were performed, either applying protein (angiogenic growth factor) therapies, such
trials were performed, either applying protein (angiogenic growth factor) therapies, such as FGF-1 or VEGF, or cell therapies using different kinds of adult stem cell populations. Research is still going on – with first promising results particularly for FGF-1 and utilization of endothelial progenitor cells.Myeloperoxidase
making correct diagnosis critical.A vascular tumor may be described in terms of being highly vascularized, or poorly vascularized, referring to the degree of blood supply to the tumor.Vascular tumors make up one of the classifications of vascular anomalies. The other grouping is vascular malformations. Vascular
less commonly congenital hemangiomas. Infantile hemangioma  Infantile hemangiomas are the most common type of vascular tumor to affect babies, accounting for 90% of hemangiomas. They are characterised by the abnormal proliferation of endothelial cells and of deviant blood vessel formation or architecture. Hypoxic stress seems to be
hemangiomas are present and fully formed at birth, and only account for 2% of the hemangiomas. They do not have the postnatal phase of proliferation common to infantile hemangiomas. There are two main variants of congenital hemangioma: non-involuting, and rapidly involuting (beginning in the
to infantile hemangiomas. There are two main variants of congenital hemangioma: non-involuting, and rapidly involuting (beginning in the first year of life). A third variant is also recognised as partially involuting. Congenital hemangiomas can also be distinguished from infantile hemangiomas in that neither variant
be distinguished from infantile hemangiomas in that neither variant of congenital hemangioma expresses the glucose transporter GLUT 1.Some cases have been associated with a mild form of thrombocytopenia. Rare cases have been associated with heart failure. Hemangioblastoma Hemangioblastomas are vascular tumors of the central nervous system. Pyogenic granuloma A range
bleed and ulcerate easily. Their colouring fades with age. Tufted angioma Tufted angiomas are hereditary hemangiomas found in infants from birth to five years of age, however they may occur in adults. They are found on the neck, shoulders, and trunk as rounded nodules. Tufted angiomas
neck, shoulders, and trunk as rounded nodules. Tufted angiomas are usually poorly defined lesions of purple colouration. The tumors are of tufts of capillary-sized vessels in lobules that are scattered in the skin, and that sometimes reach into the subcutaneous tissue, and have lymph vessels
associated with arteriovenous malformations.The origin of tufted angiomas is not clear but markers on the cells suggest a possible derivation from the endothelial cells of lymph vessels. They are also associated with the local secretion of growth factors that affect angiogenesis and promote the development of vascular lobules.Kaposiform
clear but markers on the cells suggest a possible derivation from the endothelial cells of lymph vessels. They are also associated with the local secretion of growth factors that affect angiogenesis and promote the development of vascular lobules.Kaposiform hemangioendotheliomas (KHEs) are borderline, locally destructive vascular tumors.
KHEs show as a red or purple expanding mass of soft tissue, found mostly in infants. Under the microscope KHE is characterised by nodules of tumor-like spindled endothelial cells. Unlike infantile hemangiomas, KHEs have a high mortality rate. Both KHEs and TAs are unique in that
, some acting almost as scaffolding for neuroblasts to climb during neurogenesis such as bergmann glia, while others such as microglia are a specialized form of macrophage, involved in the immune system of the brain as well as the clearance of various metabolites from the brain tissue. Astrocytes may be
the immune system of the brain as well as the clearance of various metabolites from the brain tissue. Astrocytes may be involved with both clearance of metabolites as well as transport of fuel and various beneficial substances to neurons from the capillaries of the brain. Upon CNS injury astrocytes will proliferate
as well as the clearance of various metabolites from the brain tissue. Astrocytes may be involved with both clearance of metabolites as well as transport of fuel and various beneficial substances to neurons from the capillaries of the brain. Upon CNS injury astrocytes will proliferate, causing gliosis, a form
etc. and allow for the transmission of efferent motor as well as afferent sensory signals and stimuli. This allows for voluntary and involuntary motions of muscles, as well as the perception of senses.All in all 31 spinal nerves project from the brain stem, some forming plexa as
efferent motor as well as afferent sensory signals and stimuli. This allows for voluntary and involuntary motions of muscles, as well as the perception of senses.All in all 31 spinal nerves project from the brain stem, some forming plexa as they branch out, such as the brachial
and functional properties. The tracts passing from the spinal cord to the brain pass through here.Regulatory functions of the medulla nuclei include control of blood pressure and breathing. Other nuclei are involved in balance, taste, hearing, and control of muscles of the face and neck.
functions of the medulla nuclei include control of blood pressure and breathing. Other nuclei are involved in balance, taste, hearing, and control of muscles of the face and neck.The next structure rostral to the medulla is the pons, which lies on the ventral anterior side of
the cerebellum and transmit information between the cerebellum and the cerebral cortex.In the dorsal posterior pons lie nuclei that are involved in the functions of breathing, sleep, and taste.The midbrain, or mesencephalon, is situated above and rostral to the pons. It includes nuclei linking
located in the midbrain, including control of automatic eye movements.The brainstem at large provides entry and exit to the brain for a number of pathways for motor and autonomic control of the face and neck through cranial nerves, Autonomic control of the organs is mediated by the tenth cranial
Such functions may engage the heart, blood vessels, and pupils, among others.The brainstem also holds the reticular formation, a group of nuclei involved in both arousal and alertness. Cerebellum The cerebellum lies behind the pons. The cerebellum is composed of several dividing fissures and lobes
alertness. Cerebellum The cerebellum lies behind the pons. The cerebellum is composed of several dividing fissures and lobes. Its function includes the control of posture and the coordination of movements of parts of the body, including the eyes and head, as well as the limbs. Further,
lies behind the pons. The cerebellum is composed of several dividing fissures and lobes. Its function includes the control of posture and the coordination of movements of parts of the body, including the eyes and head, as well as the limbs. Further, it is involved in motion
the pons. The cerebellum is composed of several dividing fissures and lobes. Its function includes the control of posture and the coordination of movements of parts of the body, including the eyes and head, as well as the limbs. Further, it is involved in motion that has
olfactory nerve) to the cerebral hemispheres. Previously it was considered only a "relay station", but it is engaged in the sorting of information that will reach cerebral hemispheres (neocortex).Apart from its function of sorting information from the periphery, the thalamus also connects the cerebellum and basal
engages in functions of a number of primitive emotions or feelings such as hunger, thirst and maternal bonding. This is regulated partly through control of secretion of hormones from the pituitary gland. Additionally the hypothalamus plays a role in motivation and many other behaviors of the individual. Cerebrum The
functions of a number of primitive emotions or feelings such as hunger, thirst and maternal bonding. This is regulated partly through control of secretion of hormones from the pituitary gland. Additionally the hypothalamus plays a role in motivation and many other behaviors of the individual. Cerebrum The cerebrum of
of the brain. Functionally, the cerebral cortex is involved in planning and carrying out of everyday tasks.The hippocampus is involved in storage of memories, the amygdala plays a role in perception and communication of emotion, while the basal ganglia play a major role in the coordination of
planning and carrying out of everyday tasks.The hippocampus is involved in storage of memories, the amygdala plays a role in perception and communication of emotion, while the basal ganglia play a major role in the coordination of voluntary movement.This differentiates the CNS from the PNS, which
have similar functions in the CNS and PNS, respectively. Both act to add myelin sheaths to the axons, which acts as a form of insulation allowing for better and faster proliferation of electrical signals along the nerves. Axons in the CNS are often very short, barely a few
signals along the nerves. Axons in the CNS are often very short, barely a few millimeters, and do not need the same degree of isolation as peripheral nerves. Some peripheral nerves can be over 1 meter in length, such as the nerves to the big toe. To
in a region called the ventricular zone.  The neural stem cells, principally radial glial cells, multiply and generate neurons through the process of neurogenesis, forming the rudiment of the CNS.The neural tube gives rise to both brain and spinal cord.  The anterior (or 'rostral
the laterally projecting nerves form the PNS. A molecular study found that more than 95% of the 116 genes involved in the nervous system of planarians, which includes genes related to the CNS, also exist in humans. Like planarians, vertebrates have a distinct CNS and PNS,
dorsally in the body, above the gut and notochord/spine. The basic pattern of the CNS is highly conserved throughout the different species of vertebrates and during evolution. The major trend that can be observed is towards a progressive telencephalisation: the telencephalon of reptiles is only an appendix
conserved throughout the different species of vertebrates and during evolution. The major trend that can be observed is towards a progressive telencephalisation: the telencephalon of reptiles is only an appendix to the large olfactory bulb, while in mammals it makes up most of the volume of the CNS. In
volume of the CNS. In the human brain, the telencephalon covers most of the diencephalon and the mesencephalon. Indeed, the allometric study of brain size among different species shows a striking continuity from rats to whales, and allows us to complete the knowledge about the evolution of the
and reptiles – are the only vertebrates to possess the evolutionarily recent, outermost part of the cerebral cortex known as the neocortex.The neocortex of monotremes (the duck-billed platypus and several species of spiny anteaters) and of marsupials (such as kangaroos, koalas, opossums,
neocortex of most placental mammals (eutherians).Within placental mammals, the size and complexity of the neocortex increased over time. The area of the neocortex of mice is only about 1/100 that of monkeys, and that of monkeys is only about 1/10 that of humans. In addition, rats lack
. In addition, rats lack convolutions in their neocortex (possibly also because rats are small mammals), whereas cats have a moderate degree of convolutions, and humans have quite extensive convolutions. Extreme convolution of the neocortex is found in dolphins, possibly related to their complex echolocation.
severe illness and, when malignant, can have very high mortality rates. Symptoms depend on the size, growth rate, location and malignancy of tumors and can include alterations in motor control, hearing loss, headaches and changes in cognitive ability and autonomic functioning.Specialty professional organizations recommend
(DM), commonly known as diabetes, is a group of metabolic disorders characterized by a high blood sugar level over a prolonged period of time. Symptoms often include frequent urination, increased thirst and increased appetite. If left untreated, diabetes can cause many complications. Acute complications
the pancreas not producing enough insulin, or the cells of the body not responding properly to the insulin produced. There are three main types of diabetes mellitus:Type 1 diabetes results from the pancreas's failure to produce enough insulin due to loss of beta cells. This form was
of the body not responding properly to the insulin produced. There are three main types of diabetes mellitus:Type 1 diabetes results from the pancreas's failure to produce enough insulin due to loss of beta cells. This form was previously referred to as "insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus"
the body not responding properly to the insulin produced. There are three main types of diabetes mellitus:Type 1 diabetes results from the pancreas's failure to produce enough insulin due to loss of beta cells. This form was previously referred to as "insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus"
2 diabetes begins with insulin resistance, a condition in which cells fail to respond to insulin properly. As the disease progresses, a lack of insulin may also develop. This form was previously referred to as "non insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus" (NIDDM) or "adult
combination of excessive body weight and insufficient exercise.Gestational diabetes is the third main form, and occurs when pregnant women without a previous history of diabetes develop high blood sugar levels.Type 1 diabetes must be managed with insulin injections. Prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes involves maintaining
women without a previous history of diabetes develop high blood sugar levels.Type 1 diabetes must be managed with insulin injections. Prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes involves maintaining a healthy diet, regular physical exercise, a normal body weight, and avoiding use of tobacco. Type 2
. Prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes involves maintaining a healthy diet, regular physical exercise, a normal body weight, and avoiding use of tobacco. Type 2 diabetes may be treated with medications such as insulin sensitizers with or without insulin. Control of blood pressure and maintaining proper
weight, and avoiding use of tobacco. Type 2 diabetes may be treated with medications such as insulin sensitizers with or without insulin. Control of blood pressure and maintaining proper foot and eye care are important for people with the disease. Insulin and some oral medications can cause low blood
the cases. Rates are similar in women and men. Trends suggest that rates will continue to rise. Diabetes at least doubles a person's risk of early death. In 2019, diabetes resulted in approximately 4.2 million deaths. It is the 7th leading cause of death globally.
doubles a person's risk of early death. In 2019, diabetes resulted in approximately 4.2 million deaths. It is the 7th leading cause of death globally. The global economic cost of diabetes related health expenditure in 2017 was estimated at US$727 billion.  In the United States
. In 2019, diabetes resulted in approximately 4.2 million deaths. It is the 7th leading cause of death globally. The global economic cost of diabetes related health expenditure in 2017 was estimated at US$727 billion.  In the United States, diabetes cost nearly US$327 billion in
they usually develop much more slowly and may be subtle or absent in type 2 diabetes.Several other signs and symptoms can mark the onset of diabetes although they are not specific to the disease. In addition to the known ones above, they include blurred vision, headache, fatigue
are not specific to the disease. In addition to the known ones above, they include blurred vision, headache, fatigue, slow healing of cuts, and itchy skin. Prolonged high blood glucose can cause glucose absorption in the lens of the eye, which leads to changes in
to changes in its shape, resulting in vision changes. Long-term vision loss can also be caused by diabetic retinopathy. A number of skin rashes that can occur in diabetes are collectively known as diabetic dermadromes.People with diabetes (usually but not exclusively in type 1 diabetes
1 diabetes) may also experience diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), a metabolic disturbance characterized by nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain, the smell of acetone on the breath, deep breathing known as Kussmaul breathing, and in severe cases a decreased level of consciousness. DKA requires emergency treatment
and abdominal pain, the smell of acetone on the breath, deep breathing known as Kussmaul breathing, and in severe cases a decreased level of consciousness. DKA requires emergency treatment in hospital. A rarer but more dangerous condition is hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS), which is more
rarer but more dangerous condition is hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS), which is more common in type 2 diabetes and is mainly the result of dehydration caused by high blood sugars.Treatment-related low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) is common in people with type 1 and also type
diabetes depending on the medication being used.  Most cases are mild and are not considered medical emergencies.  Effects can range from feelings of unease, sweating, trembling, and increased appetite in mild cases to more serious effects such as confusion, changes in behavior such as aggressiveness
high in rapidly absorbed carbohydrates. Severe cases can lead to unconsciousness and must be treated with intravenous glucose or injections with glucagon.All forms of diabetes increase the risk of long-term complications. These typically develop after many years (10–20) but may be the first symptom in
time.The major long-term complications relate to damage to blood vessels. Diabetes doubles the risk of cardiovascular disease and about 75% of deaths in people with diabetes are due to coronary artery disease. Other macrovascular diseases include stroke, and peripheral artery disease.The primary complications
deaths in people with diabetes are due to coronary artery disease. Other macrovascular diseases include stroke, and peripheral artery disease.The primary complications of diabetes due to damage in small blood vessels include damage to the eyes, kidneys, and nerves. Damage to the eyes, known as
, sometimes requiring dialysis or kidney transplantation. Damage to the nerves of the body, known as diabetic neuropathy, is the most common complication of diabetes. The symptoms can include numbness, tingling, pain, and altered pain sensation, which can lead to damage to the skin.
link between cognitive deficit and diabetes. Compared to those without diabetes, those with the disease have a 1.2 to 1.5-fold greater rate of decline in cognitive function. Having diabetes, especially when on insulin, increases the risk of falls in older people.Diabetes mellitus is classified
have a 1.2 to 1.5-fold greater rate of decline in cognitive function. Having diabetes, especially when on insulin, increases the risk of falls in older people.Diabetes mellitus is classified into six categories: type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, hybrid forms of diabetes,
the risk of falls in older people.Diabetes mellitus is classified into six categories: type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, hybrid forms of diabetes, hyperglycemia first detected during pregnancy, "unclassified diabetes", and "other specific types". The "hybrid forms of diabetes
forms of diabetes, hyperglycemia first detected during pregnancy, "unclassified diabetes", and "other specific types". The "hybrid forms of diabetes" contains  slowly evolving, immune-mediated diabetes of adults and ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes. The "hyperglycemia first detected
diabetes", and "other specific types". The "hybrid forms of diabetes" contains  slowly evolving, immune-mediated diabetes of adults and ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes. The "hyperglycemia first detected during pregnancy" contains gestational diabetes mellitus and diabetes mellitus in pregnancy
types" are a collection of a few dozen individual causes. Diabetes is a more variable disease than once thought and people may have combinations of forms. The term "diabetes", without qualification, refers to diabetes mellitus.Type 1 diabetes is characterized by loss of the insulin
cells of the pancreatic islets, leading to insulin deficiency. This type can be further classified as immune-mediated or idiopathic. The majority of type 1 diabetes is of the immune-mediated nature, in which a T cell-mediated autoimmune attack leads to the loss of beta
, in which a T cell-mediated autoimmune attack leads to the loss of beta cells and thus insulin. It causes approximately 10% of diabetes mellitus cases in North America and Europe. Most affected people are otherwise healthy and of a healthy weight when onset occurs. Sensitivity and
, especially in the early stages. Although it has been called "juvenile diabetes" due to the frequent onset in children, the majority of individuals living with type 1 diabetes are now adults."Brittle" diabetes, also known as unstable diabetes or labile diabetes, is a term
and endocrinopathies (e.g., Addison's disease). These phenomena are believed to occur no more frequently than in 1% to 2% of persons with type 1 diabetes.Type 1 diabetes is partly inherited, with multiple genes, including certain HLA genotypes, known to influence the
with type 1 diabetes.Type 1 diabetes is partly inherited, with multiple genes, including certain HLA genotypes, known to influence the risk of diabetes. In genetically susceptible people, the onset of diabetes can be triggered by one or more environmental factors, such as a viral infection
inherited, with multiple genes, including certain HLA genotypes, known to influence the risk of diabetes. In genetically susceptible people, the onset of diabetes can be triggered by one or more environmental factors, such as a viral infection or diet. Several viruses have been implicated, but
hypothesis in humans. Among dietary factors, data suggest that gliadin (a protein present in gluten) may play a role in the development of type 1 diabetes, but the mechanism is not fully understood.Type 1 diabetes can occur at any age, and a significant proportion is
is not fully understood.Type 1 diabetes can occur at any age, and a significant proportion is diagnosed during adulthood. Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA) is the diagnostic term applied when type 1 diabetes develops in adults; it has a slower onset than the same condition
rather than cause.Type 2 diabetes is characterized by insulin resistance, which may be combined with relatively reduced insulin secretion. The defective responsiveness of body tissues to insulin is believed to involve the insulin receptor. However, the specific defects are not known. Diabetes mellitus cases due to
specific defects are not known. Diabetes mellitus cases due to a known defect are classified separately. Type 2 diabetes is the most common type of diabetes mellitus. Many people with type 2 diabetes have evidence of prediabetes (impaired fasting glucose and/or impaired glucose tolerance) before meeting the criteria
known defect are classified separately. Type 2 diabetes is the most common type of diabetes mellitus. Many people with type 2 diabetes have evidence of prediabetes (impaired fasting glucose and/or impaired glucose tolerance) before meeting the criteria for type 2 diabetes. The progression of prediabetes to overt type
2 diabetes have evidence of prediabetes (impaired fasting glucose and/or impaired glucose tolerance) before meeting the criteria for type 2 diabetes. The progression of prediabetes to overt type 2 diabetes can be slowed or reversed by lifestyle changes or medications that improve insulin sensitivity or reduce the liver's glucose
The progression of prediabetes to overt type 2 diabetes can be slowed or reversed by lifestyle changes or medications that improve insulin sensitivity or reduce the liver's glucose production.Type 2 diabetes is primarily due to lifestyle factors and genetics. A number of lifestyle factors are known to be important to
progression of prediabetes to overt type 2 diabetes can be slowed or reversed by lifestyle changes or medications that improve insulin sensitivity or reduce the liver's glucose production.Type 2 diabetes is primarily due to lifestyle factors and genetics. A number of lifestyle factors are known to be important to
that improve insulin sensitivity or reduce the liver's glucose production.Type 2 diabetes is primarily due to lifestyle factors and genetics. A number of lifestyle factors are known to be important to the development of type 2 diabetes, including obesity (defined by a body mass index of greater
.Type 2 diabetes is primarily due to lifestyle factors and genetics. A number of lifestyle factors are known to be important to the development of type 2 diabetes, including obesity (defined by a body mass index of greater than 30), lack of physical activity, poor diet
greater than 30), lack of physical activity, poor diet, stress, and urbanization. Excess body fat is associated with 30% of cases in people of Chinese and Japanese descent, 60–80% of cases in those of European and African descent, and 100% of Pima
, stress, and urbanization. Excess body fat is associated with 30% of cases in people of Chinese and Japanese descent, 60–80% of cases in those of European and African descent, and 100% of Pima Indians and Pacific Islanders. Even those who are not obese may
may have a high waist–hip ratio.Dietary factors such as sugar-sweetened drinks are associated with an increased risk. The type of fats in the diet is also important, with saturated fat and trans fats increasing the risk and polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat decreasing the risk.
with saturated fat and trans fats increasing the risk and polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat decreasing the risk. Eating white rice excessively may increase the risk of diabetes, especially in Chinese and Japanese people. Lack of physical activity may increase the risk of diabetes in some people.Adverse childhood experiences
Eating white rice excessively may increase the risk of diabetes, especially in Chinese and Japanese people. Lack of physical activity may increase the risk of diabetes in some people.Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs), including abuse, neglect, and household difficulties, increase the likelihood of type
risk of diabetes in some people.Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs), including abuse, neglect, and household difficulties, increase the likelihood of type 2 diabetes later in life by 32%, with neglect having the strongest effect.Gestational diabetes resembles type 2 diabetes in several respects
or third trimester because of the increase in insulin-antagonist hormone levels that occurs at this time. However, after pregnancy approximately 5–10% of women with gestational diabetes are found to have another form of diabetes, most commonly type 2. Gestational diabetes is fully treatable, but requires
hormone levels that occurs at this time. However, after pregnancy approximately 5–10% of women with gestational diabetes are found to have another form of diabetes, most commonly type 2. Gestational diabetes is fully treatable, but requires careful medical supervision throughout the pregnancy. Management may include dietary
to the baby include macrosomia (high birth weight), congenital heart and central nervous system abnormalities, and skeletal muscle malformations. Increased levels of insulin in a fetus's blood may inhibit fetal surfactant production and cause infant respiratory distress syndrome. A high blood bilirubin level may result from
(high birth weight), congenital heart and central nervous system abnormalities, and skeletal muscle malformations. Increased levels of insulin in a fetus's blood may inhibit fetal surfactant production and cause infant respiratory distress syndrome. A high blood bilirubin level may result from red blood cell destruction.
Labor induction may be indicated with decreased placental function. A caesarean section may be performed if there is marked fetal distress or an increased risk of injury associated with macrosomia, such as shoulder dystocia.Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a rare autosomal dominant inherited form
injury associated with macrosomia, such as shoulder dystocia.Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a rare autosomal dominant inherited form of diabetes, due to one of several single-gene mutations causing defects in insulin production. It is significantly less common than the three main
gene defect; thus there are at least 13 subtypes of MODY. People with MODY often can control it without using insulin.Some cases of diabetes are caused by the body's tissue receptors not responding to insulin (even when insulin levels are normal, which is what separates it
at least 13 subtypes of MODY. People with MODY often can control it without using insulin.Some cases of diabetes are caused by the body's tissue receptors not responding to insulin (even when insulin levels are normal, which is what separates it from type 2 diabetes); this
least 13 subtypes of MODY. People with MODY often can control it without using insulin.Some cases of diabetes are caused by the body's tissue receptors not responding to insulin (even when insulin levels are normal, which is what separates it from type 2 diabetes); this
causes extensive damage to the pancreas may lead to diabetes (for example, chronic pancreatitis and cystic fibrosis). Diseases associated with excessive secretion of insulin-antagonistic hormones can cause diabetes (which is typically resolved once the hormone excess is removed). Many drugs impair insulin secretion and
, ICD-10 code E12), was deprecated by the World Health Organization (WHO) when the current taxonomy was introduced in 1999.Yet another form of diabetes that people may develop is double diabetes. This is when a type 1 diabetic becomes insulin resistant, the hallmark for type 2 diabetes
for type 2 diabetes or has a family history for type 2 diabetes. It was first discovered in 1990 or 1991.The following is a list of disorders that may increase the risk of diabetes:Insulin is the principal hormone that regulates the uptake of glucose from the blood into most cells
family history for type 2 diabetes. It was first discovered in 1990 or 1991.The following is a list of disorders that may increase the risk of diabetes:Insulin is the principal hormone that regulates the uptake of glucose from the blood into most cells of the body, especially liver,
1990 or 1991.The following is a list of disorders that may increase the risk of diabetes:Insulin is the principal hormone that regulates the uptake of glucose from the blood into most cells of the body, especially liver, adipose tissue and muscle, except smooth muscle, in which insulin
the body, especially liver, adipose tissue and muscle, except smooth muscle, in which insulin acts via the IGF-1. Therefore, deficiency of insulin or the insensitivity of its receptors play a central role in all forms of diabetes mellitus.The body obtains glucose from three main sources
in which insulin acts via the IGF-1. Therefore, deficiency of insulin or the insensitivity of its receptors play a central role in all forms of diabetes mellitus.The body obtains glucose from three main sources: the intestinal absorption of food; the breakdown of glycogen (glycogenolysis),
of its receptors play a central role in all forms of diabetes mellitus.The body obtains glucose from three main sources: the intestinal absorption of food; the breakdown of glycogen (glycogenolysis), the storage form of glucose found in the liver; and gluconeogenesis, the generation of
central role in all forms of diabetes mellitus.The body obtains glucose from three main sources: the intestinal absorption of food; the breakdown of glycogen (glycogenolysis), the storage form of glucose found in the liver; and gluconeogenesis, the generation of glucose from non-carbohydrate
The body obtains glucose from three main sources: the intestinal absorption of food; the breakdown of glycogen (glycogenolysis), the storage form of glucose found in the liver; and gluconeogenesis, the generation of glucose from non-carbohydrate substrates in the body. Insulin plays a critical
of food; the breakdown of glycogen (glycogenolysis), the storage form of glucose found in the liver; and gluconeogenesis, the generation of glucose from non-carbohydrate substrates in the body. Insulin plays a critical role in regulating glucose levels in the body. Insulin can inhibit
non-carbohydrate substrates in the body. Insulin plays a critical role in regulating glucose levels in the body. Insulin can inhibit the breakdown of glycogen or the process of gluconeogenesis, it can stimulate the transport of glucose into fat and muscle cells, and it can stimulate the storage
the body. Insulin plays a critical role in regulating glucose levels in the body. Insulin can inhibit the breakdown of glycogen or the process of gluconeogenesis, it can stimulate the transport of glucose into fat and muscle cells, and it can stimulate the storage of glucose in the form
in regulating glucose levels in the body. Insulin can inhibit the breakdown of glycogen or the process of gluconeogenesis, it can stimulate the transport of glucose into fat and muscle cells, and it can stimulate the storage of glucose in the form of glycogen.Insulin is released into the
glycogen or the process of gluconeogenesis, it can stimulate the transport of glucose into fat and muscle cells, and it can stimulate the storage of glucose in the form of glycogen.Insulin is released into the blood by beta cells (β-cells), found in the islets
gluconeogenesis, it can stimulate the transport of glucose into fat and muscle cells, and it can stimulate the storage of glucose in the form of glycogen.Insulin is released into the blood by beta cells (β-cells), found in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas
glucose in the form of glycogen.Insulin is released into the blood by beta cells (β-cells), found in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas, in response to rising levels of blood glucose, typically after eating. Insulin is used by about two-thirds
the blood by beta cells (β-cells), found in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas, in response to rising levels of blood glucose, typically after eating. Insulin is used by about two-thirds of the body's cells to absorb glucose from the blood
the pancreas, in response to rising levels of blood glucose, typically after eating. Insulin is used by about two-thirds of the body's cells to absorb glucose from the blood for use as fuel, for conversion to other needed molecules, or for storage. Lower glucose levels
pancreas, in response to rising levels of blood glucose, typically after eating. Insulin is used by about two-thirds of the body's cells to absorb glucose from the blood for use as fuel, for conversion to other needed molecules, or for storage. Lower glucose levels
conversion to other needed molecules, or for storage. Lower glucose levels result in decreased insulin release from the beta cells and in the breakdown of glycogen to glucose. This process is mainly controlled by the hormone glucagon, which acts in the opposite manner to insulin.If the amount
glycogen to glucose. This process is mainly controlled by the hormone glucagon, which acts in the opposite manner to insulin.If the amount of insulin available is insufficient, or if cells respond poorly to the effects of insulin (insulin resistance), or if the insulin itself is
which acts in the opposite manner to insulin.If the amount of insulin available is insufficient, or if cells respond poorly to the effects of insulin (insulin resistance), or if the insulin itself is defective, then glucose is not absorbed properly by the body cells that require
by the body cells that require it, and is not stored appropriately in the liver and muscles. The net effect is persistently high levels of blood glucose, poor protein synthesis, and other metabolic derangements, such as metabolic acidosis in cases of complete insulin deficiency.When glucose concentration
as metabolic acidosis in cases of complete insulin deficiency.When glucose concentration in the blood remains high over time, the kidneys reach a threshold of reabsorption, and the body excretes glucose in the urine (glycosuria).  This increases the osmotic pressure of the urine and inhibits reabsorption
reabsorption, and the body excretes glucose in the urine (glycosuria).  This increases the osmotic pressure of the urine and inhibits reabsorption of water by the kidney, resulting in increased urine production (polyuria) and increased fluid loss. Lost blood volume is replaced osmotically from water
a repeat of any of the above methods on a different day. It is preferable to measure a fasting glucose level because of the ease of measurement and the considerable time commitment of formal glucose tolerance testing, which takes two hours to complete and offers no prognostic advantage over the fasting
in physical activity, and eating a healthy diet. Higher levels of physical activity (more than 90 minutes per day) reduce the risk of diabetes by 28%. Dietary changes known to be effective in helping to prevent diabetes include maintaining a diet rich in whole grains and fiber
and eating less red meat and other sources of saturated fat can also help prevent diabetes. Tobacco smoking is also associated with an increased risk of diabetes and its complications, so smoking cessation can be an important preventive measure as well.The relationship between type 2 diabetes and the main
unhealthy diet, physical inactivity and tobacco use) is similar in all regions of the world. There is growing evidence that the underlying determinants of diabetes are a reflection of the major forces driving social, economic and cultural change: globalization, urbanization, population aging, and the general
far less common and less severe in people who have well-managed blood sugar levels. Per the American College of Physicians, the goal of treatment is an HbA1C level of 7-8%. Attention is also paid to other health problems that may accelerate the negative effects of
of treatment is an HbA1C level of 7-8%. Attention is also paid to other health problems that may accelerate the negative effects of diabetes. These include smoking, high blood pressure, metabolic syndrome obesity, and lack of regular exercise. Specialized footwear is widely used to
include smoking, high blood pressure, metabolic syndrome obesity, and lack of regular exercise. Specialized footwear is widely used to reduce the risk of ulcers in at-risk diabetic feet although evidence for the efficacy of this remains equivocal.People with diabetes can benefit from education about the
may help manage or prevent type-2 diabetes by lowering glycated hemoglobin levels. In addition, improvement in health may reduce the need for or number of medications needed by people who adopt a plant-based diet. Glucose control Most medications used to treat diabetes act by lowering blood sugar levels
or eye problems. There is however debate as to whether this is appropriate and cost effective for people later in life in whom the risk of hypoglycemia may be more significant.There are a number of different classes of anti-diabetic medications. Type 1 diabetes requires treatment with insulin
as a first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes, as there is good evidence that it decreases mortality. It works by decreasing the liver's production of glucose. Several other groups of drugs, mostly given by mouth, may also decrease blood sugar in type 2 diabetes. These
a first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes, as there is good evidence that it decreases mortality. It works by decreasing the liver's production of glucose. Several other groups of drugs, mostly given by mouth, may also decrease blood sugar in type 2 diabetes. These
-line treatment for type 2 diabetes, as there is good evidence that it decreases mortality. It works by decreasing the liver's production of glucose. Several other groups of drugs, mostly given by mouth, may also decrease blood sugar in type 2 diabetes. These include agents
diabetes, as there is good evidence that it decreases mortality. It works by decreasing the liver's production of glucose. Several other groups of drugs, mostly given by mouth, may also decrease blood sugar in type 2 diabetes. These include agents that increase insulin release (sulfonylureas
, may also decrease blood sugar in type 2 diabetes. These include agents that increase insulin release (sulfonylureas), agents that decrease absorption of sugar from the intestines (acarbose), agents that inhibit the enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) that inactivates incretins such as GLP-1 and GIP
as GLP-1 and GIP (sitagliptin), agents that make the body more sensitive to insulin (thiazolidinedione) and agents that increase the excretion of glucose in the urine (SGLT2 inhibitors). When insulin is used in type 2 diabetes, a long-acting formulation is usually added
. When insulin is used in type 2 diabetes, a long-acting formulation is usually added initially, while continuing oral medications. Doses of insulin are then increased until glucose targets are reached. Blood pressure lowering Cardiovascular disease is a serious complication associated with diabetes, and many international
events.2015 American Diabetes Association recommendations are that people with diabetes and albuminuria should receive an inhibitor of the renin-angiotensin system to reduce the risks of progression to end-stage renal disease, cardiovascular events, and death.  There is some evidence that angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs
ACEIs and ARBs on major cardiovascular and renal outcomes. There is no evidence that combining ACEIs and ARBs provides additional benefits. Aspirin The use of aspirin to prevent cardiovascular disease in diabetes is controversial. Aspirin is recommended by some in people at high risk of cardiovascular disease, however routine
to prevent cardiovascular disease in diabetes is controversial. Aspirin is recommended by some in people at high risk of cardiovascular disease, however routine use of aspirin has not been found to improve outcomes in uncomplicated diabetes. 2015 American Diabetes Association recommendations for aspirin use (based on expert consensus or
5–10%). National guidelines for England and Wales by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommend against the use of aspirin in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes who do not have confirmed cardiovascular disease.Weight loss surgery in those with obesity and
system, such as the United Kingdom, care may take place mainly outside hospitals, with hospital-based specialist care used only in case of complications, difficult blood sugar control, or research projects. In other circumstances, general practitioners and specialists share care in a team approach.
estimated 382 million people in 2013 and from 108 million in 1980. Accounting for the shifting age structure of the global population, the prevalence of diabetes is 8.8% among adults, nearly double the rate of 4.7% in 1980. Type 2 makes up about 90% of the
in diabetes has been found in many populations with higher type 2 incidence, possibly due to sex-related differences in insulin sensitivity, consequences of obesity and regional body fat deposition, and other contributing factors such as high blood pressure, tobacco smoking, and alcohol intake.The WHO
tobacco smoking, and alcohol intake.The WHO estimates that diabetes resulted in 1.5 million deaths in 2012, making it the 8th leading cause of death. However another 2.2 million deaths worldwide were attributable to high blood glucose and the increased risks of cardiovascular disease and other associated complications (
2017, the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) estimated that diabetes resulted in 4.0 million deaths worldwide, using modeling to estimate the total number of deaths that could be directly or indirectly attributed to diabetes.Diabetes occurs throughout the world but is more common (especially type 2) in
in Asia and Africa, where most people with diabetes will probably live in 2030. The increase in rates in developing countries follows the trend of urbanization and lifestyle changes, including increasingly sedentary lifestyles, less physically demanding work and the global nutrition transition, marked by increased intake of foods
trend of urbanization and lifestyle changes, including increasingly sedentary lifestyles, less physically demanding work and the global nutrition transition, marked by increased intake of foods that are high energy-dense but nutrient-poor (often high in sugar and saturated fats, sometimes referred to as the "
poor (often high in sugar and saturated fats, sometimes referred to as the "Western-style" diet). The global number of diabetes cases might increase by 48% between 2017 and 2045.Diabetes was one of the first diseases described, with an Egyptian manuscript from c. 1500
provokes excessive thirst. His work remained unknown in the West until 1552, when the first Latin edition was published in Venice.Two types of diabetes were identified as separate conditions for the first time by the Indian physicians Sushruta and Charaka in 400–500 CE with one type being associated with
". Ancient Greek physician Aretaeus of Cappadocia (fl. 1st century CE) used that word, with the intended meaning "excessive discharge of urine", as the name for the disease. Ultimately, the word comes from Greek διαβαίνειν (diabainein), meaning "to pass
Declaration" was the result of international efforts to improve the care accorded to those with diabetes. Doing so is important not only in terms of quality of life and life expectancy but also economically – expenses due to diabetes have been shown to be a major drain on health – and
was the result of international efforts to improve the care accorded to those with diabetes. Doing so is important not only in terms of quality of life and life expectancy but also economically – expenses due to diabetes have been shown to be a major drain on health – and productivity-
the lowest income communities (526 per 10,000 population) than from the highest income communities (236 per 10,000 population). Approximately 9.4% of diabetes-related ER visits were for the uninsured.The term "type 1 diabetes" has replaced several former terms, including childhood-
insidious. Diabetic animals are more prone to infections. The long-term complications recognized in humans are much rarer in animals. The principles of treatment (weight loss, oral antidiabetics, subcutaneous insulin) and management of emergencies (e.g. ketoacidosis) are similar to those in humans.
complications recognized in humans are much rarer in animals. The principles of treatment (weight loss, oral antidiabetics, subcutaneous insulin) and management of emergencies (e.g. ketoacidosis) are similar to those in humans.Inhalable insulin has been developed.  The original products were withdrawn due to
Medicine in 1993. Test subjects all had type 1 diabetes and were randomized to a tight glycemic arm and a control arm with the standard of care at the time; people were followed for an average of seven years, and people in the treatment had dramatically lower rates of diabetic
dramatically lower rates of diabetic complications.  It was as a landmark study at the time, and significantly changed the management of all forms of diabetes.The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) was a clinical study conducted by Z that was published in The Lancet in 1998
Around 3,800 people with type 2 diabetes were followed for an average of ten years, and were treated with tight glucose control or the standard of care, and again the treatment arm had far better outcomes.  This confirmed the importance of tight glucose control, as well as blood

also spelled haematology in British English) is the branch of medicine concerned with the study of the cause, prognosis, treatment, and prevention of diseases related to blood. It involves treating diseases that affect the production of blood and its components, such as blood cells, hemoglobin,
the study of the cause, prognosis, treatment, and prevention of diseases related to blood. It involves treating diseases that affect the production of blood and its components, such as blood cells, hemoglobin, blood proteins, bone marrow, platelets, blood vessels, spleen, and
its components, such as blood cells, hemoglobin, blood proteins, bone marrow, platelets, blood vessels, spleen, and the mechanism of coagulation. Such diseases might include hemophilia, blood clots (thrombus), other bleeding disorders, and blood cancers such as leukemia, multiple
blood clots (thrombus), other bleeding disorders, and blood cancers such as leukemia, multiple myeloma, and lymphoma. The laboratory analysis of blood is frequently performed by a medical technologist or medical laboratory scientist.Physicians specialized in hematology are  known as hematologists or haematologists. Their
or medical laboratory scientist.Physicians specialized in hematology are  known as hematologists or haematologists. Their routine work mainly includes the care and treatment of patients with hematological diseases, although some may also work at the hematology laboratory viewing blood films and bone marrow slides under the microscope, interpreting
for example, in:treating bleeding disorders such as hemophilia and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpuratreating hematological malignancies such as lymphoma and leukemia (cancers)treating hemoglobinopathiesthe science of blood transfusion and the work of a blood bankbone marrow and stem cell transplantationStarting hematologists (in the US) complete a four-year medical
this career, most job openings look for first-hand practical experience in a recognized training program that provides practice in the following: Cause of abnormalities in formation of blood and other disorders, diagnosis of numerous blood related conditions or cancers using experimentation, and the proper care and treatment
job openings look for first-hand practical experience in a recognized training program that provides practice in the following: Cause of abnormalities in formation of blood and other disorders, diagnosis of numerous blood related conditions or cancers using experimentation, and the proper care and treatment of patients in the
abnormalities in formation of blood and other disorders, diagnosis of numerous blood related conditions or cancers using experimentation, and the proper care and treatment of patients in the best manner.Hematopathology
is regarded as malignant. The male:female ratio is approximately one.Symptoms may include coughing, an upper respiratory tract infection, shortness of breath, and chest pain.  These symptoms are very non-specific, and can be caused by other types of tumor in the
infection, shortness of breath, and chest pain.  These symptoms are very non-specific, and can be caused by other types of tumor in the lung or mediastinum more generally, and by other conditions.  Imaging (X-ray, CT, MRI) may
-ray, CT, MRI) may be used to determine the presence and precise location of a tumor, but not a specific diagnosis of PPB or other tumor.Doctors are unable to tell if a child has PPB right away, and not upper respiratory tract infection, until
upper respiratory tract infection, until more test are taken and they show that there is no infection. Another symptom is pneumothorax.A number of PPBs have shown trisomy 8 (17 out of 23 cases studied per the PPB registry).  Trisomy 2 and p53 mutations/deletions
tumor, whether the cancer has spread, and the child's overall health. Surgery is the main treatment for PPB. The main goal of surgery is to remove the tumor. If the tumor is too large to be completely removed, or if it's not possible to completely
on the outside of the neck or oral cavity. Given the location of these cancers, trouble breathing may also be present.The majority of head and neck cancer is caused by the use of alcohol or tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, with increasing cases linked to the human papillomavirus
Given the location of these cancers, trouble breathing may also be present.The majority of head and neck cancer is caused by the use of alcohol or tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, with increasing cases linked to the human papillomavirus (HPV). Other risk factors include Epstein-
activity, but confirmation will likely not be known until around 2060. This is because oropharyngeal cancer typical presents in the 4th - 6th decade of life, and this is a relatively new vaccine. While screening in the general population does not appear to be useful, screening high risk
often is curable if it is diagnosed early; however, outcomes are typically poor if it is diagnosed late. Treatment may include a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Previous diagnosis and treatment of one head and neck cancer confers higher risk of developing
cancer confers higher risk of developing a second head and neck cancer or recurrence.Globally, head and neck cancer accounts for 650,000 new cases of cancer and 330,000 deaths annually on average. In 2018, it was the seventh most common cancer worldwide with 890,000 new cases documented and 450,000
United States, head and neck cancer makes up 3% of all cancer cases (averaging 53,000 new diagnoses per year) and 1.5% of cancer deaths  Notably, head and neck cancer secondary to chronic alcohol or tobacco use has been steadily declining as less of the population chronically
swelling, and visible lumps on the outside of the neck or oral cavity. Head and neck cancer often begins with benign signs and symptoms of disease, like an enlarged lymph node on the outside of the neck, a hoarse-sounding voice or progressive worsening cough or sore throat
enlarged lymph node on the outside of the neck, a hoarse-sounding voice or progressive worsening cough or sore throat. In the case of head and neck cancer, these symptoms will be notably persistent and become chronic. There may be a lump or a sore in the throat
heal, bleeding from the mouth or numbness, bad breath, discolored patches that persist in the mouth, a sore tongue, and slurring of speech if the cancer is affecting the tongue. There may also be congested sinuses, weight loss, and some numbness or paralysis of facial
numbness or paralysis of facial muscles.Squamous cell cancers are common in areas of the mouth, including the inner lip, tongue, floor of mouth, gums, and hard palate. Cancers of the mouth are strongly associated with tobacco use, especially use of chewing tobacco or dipping
, tongue, floor of mouth, gums, and hard palate. Cancers of the mouth are strongly associated with tobacco use, especially use of chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco, as well as heavy alcohol use. Cancers of this region, particularly the tongue, are more frequently treated
cancers.Surgeries for oral cancers include:Maxillectomy (can be done with or without orbital exenteration)Mandibulectomy (removal of the lower jaw or part of it)Glossectomy (tongue removal, can be total, hemi or partial)Radical neck dissectionCombinational e.g., glossectomy and laryngectomy done together.The defect is typically
). Laryngeal cancer is strongly associated with tobacco smoking.Surgery can include laser excision of small vocal cord lesions, partial laryngectomy (removal of part of the larynx) or total laryngectomy (removal of the whole larynx). If the whole larynx has been removed, the person
, adenocarcinomas, adenoid cystic carcinomas, and mucoepidermoid carcinomas. Rarer still are melanomas and lymphomas of the upper aerodigestive tract.Around 75% of cases are caused by alcohol and tobacco use.Tobacco smoking is one of the main risk factors for head and neck cancer. A major
A major carcinogenic compound in tobacco smoke is acrylonitrile. Acrylonitrile appears to indirectly cause DNA damage by increasing oxidative stress, leading to increased levels of 8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG) and formamidopyrimidine in DNA. (see image). Both 8-oxo-dG
a lifetime increased risk for head and neck cancers that is 5- to 25-fold increased over the general population.The ex-smoker's risk for developing a head and neck cancer begins to approach the risk in the general population 15 years after smoking cessation. The high prevalence
risk for developing a head and neck cancer begins to approach the risk in the general population 15 years after smoking cessation. The high prevalence of tobacco and alcohol use worldwide and the high association of these cancers with these substances makes them ideal targets for enhanced cancer prevention.Smokeless tobacco
oral cancer and oropharyngeal cancer. Cigar smoking is also an important risk factor for oral cancer.Other environmental carcinogens suspected of being potential causes of head and neck cancer include occupational exposures such as nickel ore refining, exposure to textile fibers, and woodworking. Use of marijuana, especially
being potential causes of head and neck cancer include occupational exposures such as nickel ore refining, exposure to textile fibers, and woodworking. Use of marijuana, especially when younger, has been linked to an increase in squamous-cell carcinoma cases in at least one study, while other
other studies suggest use is not shown to be associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma, or associated with decreased squamous cell carcinoma.Excessive consumption of eggs, processed meats, and red meat were associated with increased rates of cancer of the head and neck in one study, while consumption
carcinoma, or associated with decreased squamous cell carcinoma.Excessive consumption of eggs, processed meats, and red meat were associated with increased rates of cancer of the head and neck in one study, while consumption of raw and cooked vegetables seemed to be protective.Vitamin E was not
neck in one study, while consumption of raw and cooked vegetables seemed to be protective.Vitamin E was not found to prevent the development of leukoplakia, the white plaques that are the precursor for carcinomas of the mucosal surfaces, in adult smokers.Another study examined a combination of
%), and least often in the oral cavity (12%–18%) and larynx (3%–7%).Some experts estimate that while up to 50% of cancers of the tonsil may be infected with HPV, only 50% of these are likely to be caused by HPV (as opposed to
HPV16 status is associated with improved prognosis over HPV-negative OSCC.HPV can induce tumor by several mechanisms:E6 and E7 oncogenic proteins.Disruption of tumor suppressor genes.High-level DNA amplifications, for example, oncogenes.Generating alternative nonfunctional transcripts .interchromosomal rearrangements.Distinct host genome methylation
nonfunctional transcripts .interchromosomal rearrangements.Distinct host genome methylation and expression patterns, produced even when virus isn't integrated into the host genome.Induction of cancer can be associated for the expression of viral oncoproteins, the most important E6 and E7, or other mechanisms many of them run by
the most important E6 and E7, or other mechanisms many of them run by the integration such as the generation of altered transcripts, disruption of tumor suppressors, high levels of DNA amplifications, interchromosomial rearrangements, or changes in DNA methylation patterns, the latter being able to find even
, or other mechanisms many of them run by the integration such as the generation of altered transcripts, disruption of tumor suppressors, high levels of DNA amplifications, interchromosomial rearrangements, or changes in DNA methylation patterns, the latter being able to find even when the virus is identified in
degradation while pRb inhibits E7. p53 prevents cell growth when DNA is damaged by activating apoptosis and p21, a kinase that blocks the formation of cyclin D / Cdk4 avoiding pRb phosphorylation and thereby prevents release of E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation
kinase that blocks the formation of cyclin D / Cdk4 avoiding pRb phosphorylation and thereby prevents release of E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation. pRb remains bound to E2F while this action phosphorylated preventing activation of proliferation. Therefore, E6 and E7 act
E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation. pRb remains bound to E2F while this action phosphorylated preventing activation of proliferation. Therefore, E6 and E7 act synergistically in triggering cell cycle progression and therefore uncontrolled proliferation by inactivating the p53 and Rb tumor suppressors
in or near oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes and it is for this reason that the integration of the virus can greatly contribute to the development of tumor characteristics. Epstein–Barr virus Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection is associated with nasopharyngeal cancer. Nasopharyngeal cancer occurs endemically in
be measured to screen high-risk populations. Nasopharyngeal cancer has also been associated with consumption of salted fish, which may contain high levels of nitrites.The presence of acid reflux disease (gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD]) or larynx reflux disease can also be a major factor
-risk populations. Nasopharyngeal cancer has also been associated with consumption of salted fish, which may contain high levels of nitrites.The presence of acid reflux disease (gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD]) or larynx reflux disease can also be a major factor. Stomach acids that flow
are more aggressive than others depending upon their location. The stage at which the cancer is diagnosed is also a critical factor in the prognosis of throat cancer. Treatment guidelines recommend routine testing for the presence of HPV for all oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma tumours. Squamous-cell carcinoma Squamous
in both the skin and mucous membranes. It accounts for over 90% of all head and neck cancers, including more than 90% of throat cancer. Squamous cell carcinoma is most likely to appear in males over 40 years of age with a history of heavy alcohol use coupled
and neck cancers, including more than 90% of throat cancer. Squamous cell carcinoma is most likely to appear in males over 40 years of age with a history of heavy alcohol use coupled with smoking.The tumor marker Cyfra 21-1 may be useful in diagnosing squamous cell
(either of intestinal or non-intestinal cell-type).Avoidance of recognised risk factors (as described above) is the single most effective form of prevention. Regular dental examinations may identify pre-cancerous lesions in the oral cavity.When diagnosed early, oral, head and neck cancers
-cancerous lesions in the oral cavity.When diagnosed early, oral, head and neck cancers can be treated more easily and the chances of survival increase tremendously. As of 2017 it was not known if existing HPV vaccines can help prevent head and neck cancer.Improvements in diagnosis
help prevent head and neck cancer.Improvements in diagnosis and local management, as well as targeted therapy, have led to improvements in quality of life and survival for people with head and neck cancer.After a histologic diagnosis has been established and tumor extent determined, the selection of
After a histologic diagnosis has been established and tumor extent determined, the selection of appropriate treatment for a specific cancer depends on a complex array of variables, including tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors,
including tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors, and the person's preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays
tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors, and the person's preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays
preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays of treatment for most head and neck cancers and remain the standard of care in most cases. For small primary cancers without regional metastases (stage
and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays of treatment for most head and neck cancers and remain the standard of care in most cases. For small primary cancers without regional metastases (stage I or II), wide surgical excision alone or curative radiation
there has been an emphasis on the use of various induction or concomitant chemotherapy regimens.Surgery as a treatment is frequently used in most types of head and neck cancer. Usually the goal is to remove the cancerous cells entirely. This can be particularly tricky if the cancer is near
(remove) some or all of the cervical lymph nodes to prevent further spread of the disease.CO2 laser surgery is also another form of treatment. Transoral laser microsurgery allows surgeons to remove tumors from the voice box with no external incisions. It also allows access to tumors that
also allows access to tumors that are not reachable with robotic surgery. During the surgery, surgeon and pathologist work together to assess the adequacy of excision (“margin status”), minimizing the amount of normal tissue removed or damaged. This technique helps give the person as much
damaged. This technique helps give the person as much speech and swallowing function as possible after surgery.Radiation therapy is the most common form of treatment. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and
person as much speech and swallowing function as possible after surgery.Radiation therapy is the most common form of treatment. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in
, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in the treatments of cancers of the head and neck. Most people with head and neck cancer who are treated in the United States and Europe are treated with
therapy using high energy photons. At higher doses, head and neck radiation is associated with thyroid dysfunction and pituitary axis dysfunction. Radiation therapy of head and neck cancers can also cause acute skin reactions of varying levels of severity, which can be treated and managed with topically applied creams
is associated with thyroid dysfunction and pituitary axis dysfunction. Radiation therapy of head and neck cancers can also cause acute skin reactions of varying levels of severity, which can be treated and managed with topically applied creams or specialist films.Chemotherapy in throat cancer is not generally used to cure
establish in other parts of the body. Typical chemotherapy agents are a combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin. Cetuximab is also used in the treatment of throat cancer.Docetaxel-based chemotherapy has shown a very good response in locally advanced head and neck cancer. Docetaxel is the only taxane
, amifostine is often administered intravenously by a chemotherapy clinic prior to IMRT radiotherapy sessions. Amifostine protects the gums and salivary glands from the effects of radiation.There is no evidence that erythropoietin should be routinely given with radiotherapy.Photodynamic therapy may have promise in treating mucosal dysplasia and small
early clinical trials for treatment of advanced head and neck cancer.Targeted therapy, according to the National Cancer Institute, is "a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances, such as monoclonal antibodies, to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells."
pivotal significance, interpretation is difficult since cetuximab-radiotherapy was not directly compared to chemoradiotherapy. The results of ongoing studies to clarify the role of cetuximab in this disease are awaited with interest.Another study evaluated the impact of adding cetuximab to conventional chemotherapy (cisplatin) versus cisplatin alone
cetuximab to conventional chemotherapy (cisplatin) versus cisplatin alone. This study found no improvement in survival or disease-free survival with the addition of cetuximab to the conventional chemotherapy.However, another study which completed in March 2007 found that there was an improvement in survival.A 2010
.However, another study which completed in March 2007 found that there was an improvement in survival.A 2010 review concluded that the combination of cetuximab and platin/5-fluorouracil should be considered the current standard first-line regimen.Gendicine is a gene therapy that employs an adenovirus to
gene therapy that employs an adenovirus to deliver the tumor suppressor gene p53 to cells. It was approved in China in 2003 for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.The mutational profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they
gene p53 to cells. It was approved in China in 2003 for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.The mutational profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment
profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment that activates the immune system to fight cancer. One type of immunotherapy, immune checkpoint blockade, binds to and blocks inhibitory signals on
further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment that activates the immune system to fight cancer. One type of immunotherapy, immune checkpoint blockade, binds to and blocks inhibitory signals on immune cells to release their anti-cancer activities.In 2016,
inhibitory signals on immune cells to release their anti-cancer activities.In 2016, the FDA granted accelerated approval to pembrolizumab for the treatment of people with recurrent or metastatic HNSCC with disease progression on or after platinum-containing chemotherapy. Later that year, the FDA approved nivolumab for
people with head and neck cancer may experience the following symptoms and treatment side effects:Programs to support the emotional and social well-being of people who have been diagnosed with head and neck cancer may be offered. There is no clear evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions or
neck cancer may be offered. There is no clear evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions or any particular type of psychosocial program or length of time that is the most helpful for those with head and neck cancer.Although early-stage head and neck cancers (especially laryngeal and
cancer.Although early-stage head and neck cancers (especially laryngeal and oral cavity) have high cure rates, up to 50% of people with head and neck cancer present with advanced disease.Cure rates decrease in locally advanced cases, whose probability of cure is inversely related
up to 50% of people with head and neck cancer present with advanced disease.Cure rates decrease in locally advanced cases, whose probability of cure is inversely related to tumor size and even more so to the extent of regional node involvement. (citation needed). HPV-
and neck squamous-cell cancers. These staging systems attempt to standardize clinical trial criteria for research studies, and attempt to define prognostic categories of disease. Squamous cell cancers of the head and neck are staged according to the TNM classification system, where T is the size and configuration
are staged according to the TNM classification system, where T is the size and configuration of the tumor, N is the presence or absence of lymph node metastases, and M is the presence or absence of distant metastases. The T, N, and M characteristics are combined to
produce a “stage” of the cancer, from I to IVB.Survival advantages provided by new treatment modalities have been undermined by the significant percentage of people cured of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) who subsequently develop second primary tumors. The incidence of second primary tumors ranges
, called field cancerization.Many people with head and neck cancer are also not able to eat sufficiently. A tumor may impair a person's ability to swallow and eat, and throat cancer may affect the digestive system. The difficulty in swallowing can lead to a person to choke
throat cancer may affect the digestive system. The difficulty in swallowing can lead to a person to choke on their food in the early stages of digestion and interfere with the food's smooth travels down into the esophagus and beyond.The treatments for throat cancer can also be harmful to
vomiting can lead to an electrolyte imbalance which has serious consequences for the proper functioning of the heart. Frequent vomiting can also upset the balance of stomach acids which has a negative impact on the digestive system, especially the lining of the stomach and esophagus.Enteral feeding, a method
on the digestive system, especially the lining of the stomach and esophagus.Enteral feeding, a method that adds nutrients directly into a person's stomach using a nasogastric feeding tube or a gastrostomy tube, may be necessary for some people. Further research is required to determine the most
If the throat cancer is near the bottom of the throat, it has a high likelihood of spreading to the lungs and interfering with the person's ability to breathe; this is even more likely if the person is a smoker, because they are highly susceptible to lung cancer.Cancer
the throat cancer is near the bottom of the throat, it has a high likelihood of spreading to the lungs and interfering with the person's ability to breathe; this is even more likely if the person is a smoker, because they are highly susceptible to lung cancer.Cancer
decreased ability or inability to eat, speak or effectively communicate. Physical appearance is often altered by both the cancer itself or as a consequence of treatment side effects. Psychological distress may occur and feelings such as uncertainty and fear may arise. Some people may also have a changed physical
Experience Increased Caregiver Distress Unique to care for Head and Neck Cancer PatientsMultiple studies have shown caregivers for head and neck cancer patients show higher rates of distress and poorer mental health compared to both the general population as well as those caring for non-head-and-neck cancer patients
will encounter during the treatment and recovery phase for this unique patient population, which span both technical and emotional support. Of note, caregivers of patient's who report lower quality of life, demonstrate increased burden and fatigue that extents beyond the treatment phase.Examples of technically difficult caregiver
phase for this unique patient population, which span both technical and emotional support. Of note, caregivers of patient's who report lower quality of life, demonstrate increased burden and fatigue that extents beyond the treatment phase.Examples of technically difficult caregiver duties include: tube feeding, oral
throat cancer can throw the nervous system into chaos, making it unable to properly regulate and control the body.The number of new cases of head and neck cancers in the United States was 40,490 in 2006, accounting for about 3% of adult malignancies. A total of 11,170
in the Far East. In Southeast China and Taiwan, head and neck cancer, specifically nasopharyngeal cancer, is the most-common cause of death in young men.In 2008, there were 22,900 cases of oral cavity cancer, 12,250 cases of laryngeal cancer, and 12,410 cases
cases of pharyngeal cancer in the United States.In 2002, 7,400 Americans were projected to die of these cancers.More than 70% of throat cancers are at an advanced stage when discovered.Men are 89% more likely than women to be diagnosed with, and are almost
and are almost twice as likely to die of these cancers.African Americans are disproportionately affected by head and neck cancer, with younger ages of incidence, increased mortality, and more advanced disease at presentation. Laryngeal cancer incidence is higher in African Americans relative to white, Asian,
rare neuroendocrine neoplasm that may develop at various body sites (including the head, neck, thorax and abdomen). When the same type of tumor is found in the adrenal gland, they are referred to as a pheochromocytoma. They are rare tumors, with an overall estimated incidence
gland, they are referred to as a pheochromocytoma. They are rare tumors, with an overall estimated incidence of 1/300,000. Unlike other types of cancer, there is no test that determines benign from malignant tumors; long-term follow-up is therefore recommended for all individuals with
individuals with paraganglioma.Most paragangliomas are either asymptomatic or present as a painless mass. While all contain neurosecretory granules, only in 1–3% of cases is secretion of hormones such as catecholamines abundant enough to be clinically significant; in that case manifestations often resemble those of pheochromocytomas (intra
Most paragangliomas are either asymptomatic or present as a painless mass. While all contain neurosecretory granules, only in 1–3% of cases is secretion of hormones such as catecholamines abundant enough to be clinically significant; in that case manifestations often resemble those of pheochromocytomas (intra-medullary paraganglioma).About 75
such as catecholamines abundant enough to be clinically significant; in that case manifestations often resemble those of pheochromocytomas (intra-medullary paraganglioma).About 75% of paragangliomas are sporadic; the remaining 25% are hereditary (and have an increased likelihood of being multiple and of developing at an earlier age
important role in familial adrenal pheochromocytoma and extra-adrenal paraganglioma (of abdomen and thorax), although there is considerable overlap in the types of tumors associated with SDHB and SDHD gene mutations. Paragangliomas may also occur in MEN type 2A and 2B. Other genes related to familial paraganglioma are
protein. By histochemistry, the paraganglioma cells are argyrophilic, periodic acid Schiff negative, mucicarmine negative, and argentaffin negative.About 85% of paragangliomas develop in the abdomen; only 12% develop in the chest and 3% in the head and neck region (the latter are
symptomatic). While most are single, rare multiple cases occur (usually in a hereditary syndrome). Paragangliomas are described by their site of origin and are often given special names:Head and neck paraganglioma (HNPGL):  There are various types of head and neck paraganglioma;
are described by their site of origin and are often given special names:Head and neck paraganglioma (HNPGL):  There are various types of head and neck paraganglioma; they may have specialized names depending on the precise location.Carotid paraganglioma (carotid body tumor): Is the most
with a reddish bulge behind an intact ear drum.  This condition is also known as the "Red drum".  On application of pressure to the external ear canal with the help of a pneumatic ear speculum the mass could be seen to blanch.  This sign is
the internal carotid artery (aberrant ICA) is a normal variant and can be mistaken with glomus jugulare.Organ of Zuckerkandl: A collection of paraganglia near the bifurcation of the aorta, comprising a small mass of neural crest-derived chromaffin cells. Serves as a common origin of
in dysphagia and hoarseness.Pulmonary paraganglioma: These occur in the lung and may be either single or multiple.Other sites: Rare sites of involvement are the larynx, nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses, thyroid gland, and the thoracic inlet, as well as the bladder in extremely
number of new cases each year).Primary liver cancer is globally the sixth-most frequent cancer (6%) and the second-leading cause of death from cancer (9%). In 2018, it occurred in 841,000 people and resulted in 782,000 deaths. In 2015, 263,000
deaths. In 2015, 263,000 deaths from liver cancer were due to hepatitis B, 245,000 to alcohol and 167,000 to hepatitis C. Higher rates of liver cancer occur where hepatitis B and C are common, including Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Males are more often affected with HCC
65 years old. Five-year survival rate is 18.4% in the United States, and 40.4% in Japan.The leading cause of liver cancer is cirrhosis due to hepatitis B, hepatitis C or alcohol. Other causes include aflatoxin, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and liver flukes. The most common types are hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which makes up 80% of cases, and cholangiocarcinoma. Less common types include mucinous cystic neoplasm and intraductal papillary biliary neoplasm. The diagnosis may be supported by blood tests
. The diagnosis may be supported by blood tests and medical imaging, with confirmation by tissue biopsy.Given that there are many different causes of liver cancer, there are many approaches to liver cancer prevention. These efforts include immunization against hepatitis B, hepatitis B treatment, hepatitis C
liver cancer prevention. These efforts include immunization against hepatitis B, hepatitis B treatment, hepatitis C treatment, decreasing alcohol use, and management of obesity and diabetes. Screening is recommended in those with chronic liver disease. For example, it is recommended that people with chronic liver disease
who are at risk for hepatocellular carcinoma be screened every 6 months using ultrasound imaging.Because liver cancer is an umbrella term for many types of cancer, the signs and symptoms depend on what type of cancer is present. Cholangiocarcinoma is associated with sweating, jaundice, abdominal pain,
months using ultrasound imaging.Because liver cancer is an umbrella term for many types of cancer, the signs and symptoms depend on what type of cancer is present. Cholangiocarcinoma is associated with sweating, jaundice, abdominal pain, weight loss and liver enlargement. Hepatocellular carcinoma is associated with
may be closely followed.Viral infection with either hepatitis C virus (HCV) or Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is the chief cause of liver cancer in the world today, accounting for 80% of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The viruses cause HCC because massive inflammation,
. HCC usually arises after cirrhosis, with an annual incidence of 1.7% in cirrhotic HCV-infected individuals. Around 5-10% of individuals that become infected with HBV become chronic carriers, and around 30% of these acquire chronic liver disease, which can lead to HCC
around 30% of these acquire chronic liver disease, which can lead to HCC. HBV infection is also linked to cholangiocarcinoma. The role of viruses other than HCV or HBV in liver cancer is much less clear, even though there is some evidence that co-infection of HBV
gene expression, and promoting or repressing cellular signal transduction pathways. By doing this, the viruses can prevent cells from undergoing a programmed form of cell death (apoptosis) and promote viral replication and persistence.HBV and HCV also induce malignant changes by causing DNA damage and genomic instability
with DNA repair enzymes, and HCV causes activation of a mutator enzyme.In addition to virus-related cirrhosis described above, other causes of cirrhosis can lead to HCC. Alcohol intake correlates with risk of HCC, and the risk is far greater in individuals with an alcohol-
to cancer, including hereditary hemochromatosis and primary biliary cirrhosis.Aflatoxin exposure can lead to the development of HCC. The aflatoxins are a group of chemicals produced by the fungi Aspergillus flavus (the name comes from A. flavus toxin) and A. parasiticus. Food contamination by the fungi leads
chemicals, which are very toxic to the liver. Common foodstuffs contaminated with the toxins are cereals, peanuts, and other vegetables. Contamination of food is common in Africa, South-East Asia, and China. Concurrent HBV infection and aflatoxin exposure increases the risk for liver cancer
HBV infected individuals without aflatoxin exposure. The mechanism by which aflatoxins cause cancer is through mutations and epigenetic alterations.  Aflatoxins induce a spectrum of mutations including a very frequent mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene.  Mutation in p53, presumably in conjunction with other aflatoxin-induced
suppressor gene.  Mutation in p53, presumably in conjunction with other aflatoxin-induced mutations and epigenetic alterations, is likely a common cause of aflatoxin-induced carcinogenesis.High grade dysplastic nodules are precancerous lesions of the liver. Within two years, there is a risk for cancer
.High grade dysplastic nodules are precancerous lesions of the liver. Within two years, there is a risk for cancer arising from these nodules of 30–40%.Obesity has emerged as an important risk factor, as it can lead to steatohepatitis.Diabetes increases the risk for HCC.Smoking increases the risk for
risk for HCC.Smoking increases the risk for HCC compared to non-smokers and previous smokers.There is around 5-10% lifetime risk of cholangiocarcinoma in people with primary sclerosing cholangitis.Liver fluke infection increases the risk for cholangiocarcinoma, and this is the reason why Thailand has particularly
. When imaging the liver with ultrasound, a mass greater than 2 cm has more than 95% chance of being HCC. The majority of cholangiocarcimas occur in the hilar region of the liver, and often present as bile duct obstruction. If the cause of obstruction is suspected to
HCC. The majority of cholangiocarcimas occur in the hilar region of the liver, and often present as bile duct obstruction. If the cause of obstruction is suspected to be malignant, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), ultrasound, CT, MRI and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)
), ultrasound, CT, MRI and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) are used.Tumor markers, chemicals sometimes found in the blood of people with cancer, can be helpful in diagnosing and monitoring the course of liver cancers. High levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)
are used.Tumor markers, chemicals sometimes found in the blood of people with cancer, can be helpful in diagnosing and monitoring the course of liver cancers. High levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in the blood can be found in many cases of HCC and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
chemicals sometimes found in the blood of people with cancer, can be helpful in diagnosing and monitoring the course of liver cancers. High levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in the blood can be found in many cases of HCC and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. Cholangiocarcinoma can be detected with
because adenomas are usually benign). HCC is a cancer formed by liver cells, known as hepatocytes, that become malignant. In terms of cancer deaths, worldwide HCC is considered the 3rd most common cause of  cancer mortalities.  Another type of cancer formed by liver cells
become malignant. In terms of cancer deaths, worldwide HCC is considered the 3rd most common cause of  cancer mortalities.  Another type of cancer formed by liver cells is hepatoblastoma, which is specifically formed by immature liver cells. It is a rare malignant tumor that primarily develops
cancers but are cancers from other sites in the body that have spread to the liver (known as metastases). Frequently, the site of origin is the gastrointestinal tract, since the liver is close to many of these metabolically active, blood-rich organs near to blood vessels
tumors mainly of the appendix), but also from breast cancer, ovarian cancer, lung cancer, renal cancer, prostate cancer.Prevention of cancers can be separated into primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention. Primary prevention preemptively reduces exposure to a risk factor for liver cancer.
harvest intervention to discourage mold, which has been effective in west Africa. Reducing alcohol abuse, obesity, and diabetes would also reduce rates of liver cancer. Diet control in hemochromatosis could decrease the risk of iron overload, decreasing the risk of cancer.Secondary prevention includes both cure
Africa. Reducing alcohol abuse, obesity, and diabetes would also reduce rates of liver cancer. Diet control in hemochromatosis could decrease the risk of iron overload, decreasing the risk of cancer.Secondary prevention includes both cure of the agent involved in the formation of cancer (carcinogenesis)
, and diabetes would also reduce rates of liver cancer. Diet control in hemochromatosis could decrease the risk of iron overload, decreasing the risk of cancer.Secondary prevention includes both cure of the agent involved in the formation of cancer (carcinogenesis) and the prevention of carcinogenesis if this
could decrease the risk of iron overload, decreasing the risk of cancer.Secondary prevention includes both cure of the agent involved in the formation of cancer (carcinogenesis) and the prevention of carcinogenesis if this is not possible. Cure of virus-infected individuals is not possible, but
decreasing the risk of cancer.Secondary prevention includes both cure of the agent involved in the formation of cancer (carcinogenesis) and the prevention of carcinogenesis if this is not possible. Cure of virus-infected individuals is not possible, but treatment with antiviral drugs such as interferon can
both cure of the agent involved in the formation of cancer (carcinogenesis) and the prevention of carcinogenesis if this is not possible. Cure of virus-infected individuals is not possible, but treatment with antiviral drugs such as interferon can decrease the risk of liver cancer. Chlorophyllin may
is not possible. Cure of virus-infected individuals is not possible, but treatment with antiviral drugs such as interferon can decrease the risk of liver cancer. Chlorophyllin may have potential in reducing the effects of aflatoxin.Tertiary prevention includes treatments to prevent the recurrence of liver cancer.
possible, but treatment with antiviral drugs such as interferon can decrease the risk of liver cancer. Chlorophyllin may have potential in reducing the effects of aflatoxin.Tertiary prevention includes treatments to prevent the recurrence of liver cancer. These include the use of chemotherapy drugs and antiviral drugs.Partial
decrease the risk of liver cancer. Chlorophyllin may have potential in reducing the effects of aflatoxin.Tertiary prevention includes treatments to prevent the recurrence of liver cancer. These include the use of chemotherapy drugs and antiviral drugs.Partial surgical resection is the optimal treatment for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC
may have potential in reducing the effects of aflatoxin.Tertiary prevention includes treatments to prevent the recurrence of liver cancer. These include the use of chemotherapy drugs and antiviral drugs.Partial surgical resection is the optimal treatment for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) when patients have sufficient hepatic function reserve
antiviral drugs.Partial surgical resection is the optimal treatment for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) when patients have sufficient hepatic function reserve. Increased risk of complications such as liver failure can occur with resection of cirrhotic (i.e. less-than-optimally functional) livers. 5-year survival
due to spread of the initial tumor or formation of new tumors . Liver transplantation can also be considered in cases of HCC where this form of treatment can be tolerated and the tumor fits specific criteria (such as the Milan criteria). In general, patients who are being considered
, patients who are being considered for liver transplantation have multiple hepatic lesions, severe underlying liver dysfunction, or both. Less than 30–40% of individuals with HCC are eligible for surgery and transplant because the cancer is often detected at a late stage. Also, HCC can progress during
There are many forms of percutaneous ablation, which consist of either injecting chemicals into the liver (ethanol or acetic acid) or producing extremes of temperature using radio frequency ablation, microwaves, lasers or cryotherapy. Of these, radio frequency ablation has one of the best reputations in HCC
tumors close to other organs and blood vessels due to heat generation and the heat sink effect, respectively. In addition, long-term of outcomes of percutaneous ablation procedures for HCC have not been well studied. In general, surgery is the preferred treatment modality when possible.Systemic
or other particles. Because most systemic drugs have no efficacy in the treatment of HCC, research into the molecular pathways involved in the production of liver cancer produced sorafenib, a targeted therapy drug that prevents cell proliferation and blood cell growth. Sorafenib obtained FDA approval for the treatment of
technology it is possible to provide well-targeted radiation to the tumor, minimizing the dose to the rest of the liver. Dual treatments of radiotherapy plus chemoembolization, local chemotherapy, systemic chemotherapy or targeted therapy drugs may show benefit over radiotherapy alone.Resection is an option in cholangiocarcinoma
, systemic chemotherapy or targeted therapy drugs may show benefit over radiotherapy alone.Resection is an option in cholangiocarcinoma, but fewer than 30% of cases of cholangiocarcinoma are resectable at diagnosis. After surgery, recurrence rates are up to 60%. Liver transplant may be used where partial
chemotherapy or targeted therapy drugs may show benefit over radiotherapy alone.Resection is an option in cholangiocarcinoma, but fewer than 30% of cases of cholangiocarcinoma are resectable at diagnosis. After surgery, recurrence rates are up to 60%. Liver transplant may be used where partial resection is
up to 60%. Liver transplant may be used where partial resection is not an option, and adjuvant chemoradiation may benefit some cases.60% of cholangiocarcinomas form in the perihilar region and photodynamic therapy can be used to improve quality of life and survival time in these unresectable cases. Photodynamic
option, and adjuvant chemoradiation may benefit some cases.60% of cholangiocarcinomas form in the perihilar region and photodynamic therapy can be used to improve quality of life and survival time in these unresectable cases. Photodynamic therapy is a novel treatment that utilitizes light activated molecules to treat the tumor. The
causes the release of toxic reactive oxygen species, killing tumor cells.Systemic chemotherapies such as gemcitabine and cisplatin are sometimes used in inoperable cases of cholangiocarcinoma.Radio frequency ablation, transarterial chemoembolization and internal radiotherapy (brachytherapy) all show promise in the treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.Radiotherapy may be
sometimes used in inoperable cases of cholangiocarcinoma.Radio frequency ablation, transarterial chemoembolization and internal radiotherapy (brachytherapy) all show promise in the treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.Radiotherapy may be used in the adjuvant setting or for palliative treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.Removing the tumor by either surgical resection or liver
internal radiotherapy (brachytherapy) all show promise in the treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.Radiotherapy may be used in the adjuvant setting or for palliative treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.Removing the tumor by either surgical resection or liver transplant can be used in the treatment of hepatoblastoma. In some cases surgery can
the adjuvant setting or for palliative treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.Removing the tumor by either surgical resection or liver transplant can be used in the treatment of hepatoblastoma. In some cases surgery can offer a cure. Chemotherapy may be used before and after surgery and transplant.Chemotherapy, including cisplatin
be used before and after surgery and transplant.Chemotherapy, including cisplatin, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin are used for the systemic treatment of hepatoblastoma. Out of these drugs, cisplatin seems to be the most effective.Globally, as of 2010, liver cancer resulted in 754,000
.Globally, as of 2010, liver cancer resulted in 754,000 deaths, up from 460,000 in 1990, making it the third leading cause of cancer death after lung and stomach. In 2012, it represented 7% of cancer diagnoses in men, the 5th most diagnosed cancer that
from 460,000 in 1990, making it the third leading cause of cancer death after lung and stomach. In 2012, it represented 7% of cancer diagnoses in men, the 5th most diagnosed cancer that year. Of these deaths 340,000 were secondary to hepatitis B, 196,000 were secondary
were secondary to hepatitis B, 196,000 were secondary to hepatitis C, and 150,000 were secondary to alcohol. HCC, the most common form of liver cancer, shows a striking geographical distribution. China has 50% of HCC cases globally, and more than 80% of total cases
Asia due to hepatitis B virus. Cholangiocarcinoma also has a significant geographical distribution, with Thailand showing the highest rates worldwide due to the presence of liver fluke.The number of new cases of hepatocellular carcinoma per year in India in males is about 4.1 and for females 1.2 per 100,000
hepatocellular carcinoma per year in India in males is about 4.1 and for females 1.2 per 100,000. It typically occurs between 40 and 70 years of age.Liver cancer is the eighteenth most common cancer in the UK (around 4,300 people were diagnosed with liver cancer in the UK in
the UK (around 4,300 people were diagnosed with liver cancer in the UK in 2011), and it is the twelfth most common cause of cancer death (around 4,500 people died of the disease in 2012).Liver cancer death rates for adults aged 25 and over increased 43 percent from 7.2
Other symptoms may include difficult or painful swallowing, new lumps or bumps in the neck, a swelling in the mouth, or a feeling of numbness in the mouth or lips.Risk factors include tobacco and alcohol use. With both tobacco and drinking alcohol, the risk of oral
times greater. Other risk factors include HPV infection, chewing paan, and sun exposure on the lower lip. Oral cancer is a subgroup of head and neck cancers. Diagnosis is made by biopsy of the concerning area, followed by investigation with CT scan, MRI, PET scan
Oral cancer can be prevented by avoiding tobacco products, limiting alcohol use, sun protection on the lower lip, HPV vaccination, and avoidance of paan. Treatments used for oral cancer can include a combination of surgery (to remove the tumor and regional lymph nodes), radiation therapy
use, sun protection on the lower lip, HPV vaccination, and avoidance of paan. Treatments used for oral cancer can include a combination of surgery (to remove the tumor and regional lymph nodes), radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or targeted therapy.  The types of treatments
combination of surgery (to remove the tumor and regional lymph nodes), radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or targeted therapy.  The types of treatments will depend on the size, locations, and spread of the cancer taken into consideration with the general health of the person.In
commonly a mass. It can also be associated with a white patch, loose teeth, bleeding gums, persistent ear ache, a feeling of numbness in the lip and chin, or swelling.When the cancer extends to the throat, there can also be difficulty swallowing, painful
of which is tobacco. Like all environmental factors, the rate at which cancer will develop is dependent on the dose, frequency and method of application of the carcinogen (the substance that is causing the cancer). Aside from cigarette smoking, other carcinogens for oral cancer include alcohol
-containing mouthwashes as also being potential causes. The claim was that constant exposure to these alcohol-containing rinses, even in the absence of smoking and drinking, leads to significant increases in the development of oral cancer. However, studies conducted in 1985, 1995, and 2003
evidence does not support a connection between oral cancer and alcohol-containing mouthrinse". A 2008 study suggests that acetaldehyde (a breakdown product of alcohol) is implicated in oral cancer, but this study specifically focused on abusers of alcohol and made no reference to mouthwash.Infection with
A 2008 study suggests that acetaldehyde (a breakdown product of alcohol) is implicated in oral cancer, but this study specifically focused on abusers of alcohol and made no reference to mouthwash.Infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), particularly type 16 (there are over 180 types)
to 1, males over females 3 to 1, and 75% of the time people who have used tobacco products or are heavy users of alcohol. This new and rapidly growing subpopulation between 30 and 50 years old, is predominantly nonsmoking, white, and males slightly outnumber females
tobacco caused disease.Chewing betel, paan and Areca is known to be a strong risk factor for developing oral cancer even in the absence of tobacco. It increases the rate of oral cancer 2.1 times, through a variety of genetic and related effects through local irritation of the mucous
actinic cheilitis. In the Indian subcontinent oral submucous fibrosis is very common due to betel nut chewing. This condition is characterized by limited opening of mouth and burning sensation on eating of spicy food. This is a progressive lesion in which the opening of the mouth becomes progressively limited,
(2) staging, and (3) treatment planning. A complete history, and clinical examination is first completed, then a wedge of tissue is cut from the suspicious lesion for tissue diagnosis. This might be done with scalpel biopsy, punch biopsy, fine or core needle
structure. They may add additional information that can be used in staging, and treatment planning, such as the mitotic rate, the depth of invasion, and the HPV status of the tissue.After the tissue is confirmed cancerous, other tests will be completed to:better assess
the body (chest X-ray, nuclear medicine).Other, more invasive tests, may also be completed such as fine needle aspiration, biopsy of lymph nodes, and sentinel node biopsy. When the cancer has spread to lymph nodes, their exact location, size, and spread beyond
the lymph nodes) needs to be determined, as each can have a significant impact on treatment and prognosis. Small differences in the pattern of lymph node spread, can have a significant impact on treatment and prognosis. Panendoscopy may be recommended, because the tissues of the entire upper
removed to determine the prognosis, need for additional surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, immunotherapy, or other interventions.Oral cancer is a subgroup of head and neck cancers which includes those of the oropharynx, larynx, nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses,  salivary glands, and thyroid gland
those of the oropharynx, larynx, nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses,  salivary glands, and thyroid gland. Oral melanoma, while part of head and neck cancers is considered separately. Other cancers can occur in the mouth (such as bone cancer, lymphoma, or metastatic cancers
, or metastatic cancers from distant sites) but are also considered separately from oral cancers.Oral cancer staging is an assessment of the degree of spread of the cancer from its original source. It is one of the factors affecting both the prognosis and the potential treatment of oral cancer
to be classified into a prognostic staging group;The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) in 2013 stated evidence was insufficient to determine the balance of benefits and harms of screening for oral cancer in adults without symptoms by primary care providers. The American Academy of Family Physicians comes to similar
years who have periodic health examinations should have the oral cavity examined for cancer. The American Dental Association recommends that providers remain alert for signs of cancer during routine examinations.There are a variety of screening devices, however, there is no evidence that routine use of these devices in
cavity examined for cancer. The American Dental Association recommends that providers remain alert for signs of cancer during routine examinations.There are a variety of screening devices, however, there is no evidence that routine use of these devices in general dental practice is helpful. However, there are
evidence that routine use of these devices in general dental practice is helpful. However, there are compelling reasons to be concerned about the risk of harm this device may cause if routinely used in general practice. Such harms include false positives, unnecessary surgical biopsies and a financial burden.
surgery or radiation will cause severe limited mouth opening, part of the bone is also removed with the tumor. Management of the neck Spread of cancer from the oral cavity to the lymph nodes of the neck has a significant effect on survival. Between 60–70% of people with early
the neck Spread of cancer from the oral cavity to the lymph nodes of the neck has a significant effect on survival. Between 60–70% of people with early stage oral cancer will have no lymph node involvement of the neck clinically, but 20–30% of those people (or up
the neck clinically, but 20–30% of those people (or up to 20% of all those affected) will have clinically undetectable spread of cancer to the lymph nodes of the neck (called occult disease).The management of the neck is crucial, since spread to it reduces the chance
cancer to the lymph nodes of the neck (called occult disease).The management of the neck is crucial, since spread to it reduces the chance of survival by 50%. If there is evidence of lymph node involvement of the neck, during the diagnostic phase, then a modified radical
occult disease).The management of the neck is crucial, since spread to it reduces the chance of survival by 50%. If there is evidence of lymph node involvement of the neck, during the diagnostic phase, then a modified radical neck dissection is generally performed. Where the neck lymph
the neck, during the diagnostic phase, then a modified radical neck dissection is generally performed. Where the neck lymph nodes have no evidence of involvement clinically, but the oral cavity lesion is high risk for spread (e.g. T2 or above lesions), then a neck dissection of
pathologists may be involved at this stage. Treatment of oral cancer will usually be by a multidisciplinary team, with treatment professionals from the realms of radiation, surgery, chemotherapy, nutrition, dentistry, and even psychology all possibly involved with diagnosis, treatment, rehabilitation, and care.
oropharyngeal cancer. It is estimated that there were 61,400 cases of oral and lip cancer within Europe in 2012. Hungary recorded the highest number of mortality and morbidity due to oral and pharyngeal cancer among all European countries while Cyprus reported the lowest numbers  United Kingdom British Cancer Research found
Research found 2,386 deaths due to oral cancer in 2014; other studies show this is particularly within the elder population category; only 6% of people affected by oral cancer are under 45. The UK is 16th-lowest for males and 11th-highest for females for oral cancer
UK (around 6,800 people were diagnosed with oral cancer in the UK in 2011), and it is the nineteenth-most -common cause of cancer death (around 2,100 people died from the disease in 2012). Northern Europe The highest incidence of oral and pharyngeal cancer was recorded
incidence rate of oral and pharyngeal cancer in Denmark could be attributed to their higher alcohol intake than citizens of other Scandinavian countries and low intake of fruits and vegetables in general. Eastern Europe Hungary (23.3), Slovakia (16.4), and Romania (15.5) reported the highest
cancer, and nearly 12000 from the mouth, and the remainder from the oral cavity and pharynx. In the previous year, 1.6% of lip and oral cavity cancers were diagnosed, where the age-standardised incidence rate (ASIR) across all geographic regions of United States of
diagnosed, with incidence rates being more than twice as high in men than women.Oral cancer is one of the most-common types of cancer in Asia due to its association with smoking (tobacco, bidi), betel quid and alcohol consumption. Regionally incidence varies with highest
oral cancer ranged from 1.6 to 8.6/ 100,000 and 1.8 to 2.13/ 100,000 respectively. According to GLOBOCAN 2012, the estimated age-standardised rates of cancer incidence and mortality was higher in males than females. However, in some areas, specifically South East Asia, similar rates were recorded
51–55. In 2012, there were 97,400 deaths recorded due to oral cancer. India Oral cancer is the third-most-common form of cancer in India with over 77 000 new cases diagnosed in 2012 (2.3:1 male to female ratio). Studies estimate over five deaths per
2.3:1 male to female ratio). Studies estimate over five deaths per hour. One of the reasons behind such high incidence might be popularity of betel and areca nuts, which are considered to be risk factors for development of oral cavity cancers.There is limited data for the prevalence
parts of the mouth. The data suggests lip cancer has the highest incidence rate while gingival cancer has the lowest rate overall. In terms of mortality rates, oropharyngeal cancer has the highest rate in males and tongue cancer has the highest rate in females. Lip, palatal and gingival
, white blood cells or platelets are produced in the bone marrow.  Myelo refers to the bone marrow, proliferative describes the rapid growth of blood cells and neoplasm describes that growth as abnormal and uncontrolled.The overproduction of blood cells is often associated with a somatic mutation, for
refers to the bone marrow, proliferative describes the rapid growth of blood cells and neoplasm describes that growth as abnormal and uncontrolled.The overproduction of blood cells is often associated with a somatic mutation, for example in the JAK2, CALR, TET2, and MPL gene markers.In
(abnormal growth) starts out as benign and can later become malignant.As of 2016, the World Health Organization lists the following subcategories of MPNs:Chronic myeloid leukemia  (CML)Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL)Polycythemia vera (PV)Primary myelofibrosis (PMF)PMF, Prefibrotic StagePMF, Overt Fibrotic StageEssential thrombocythemia
blast cells) of the myeloid lineages in the bone marrow develop somatic mutations which cause them to grow abnormally. There is a similar category of disease for the lymphoid lineage, the lymphoproliferative disorders acute lymphoblastic leukemia, lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple myeloma.People with MPNs might
saturation and carboxyhaemoglobin level, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase level, vitamin B12 (or B12 binding capacity), serum urate or direct sequencing of the patient's DNA. According to WHO diagnostic criteria published in 2016, myeloproliferative neoplasms are diagnosed as follows:Chronic myeloid leukemiaChronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
and carboxyhaemoglobin level, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase level, vitamin B12 (or B12 binding capacity), serum urate or direct sequencing of the patient's DNA. According to WHO diagnostic criteria published in 2016, myeloproliferative neoplasms are diagnosed as follows:Chronic myeloid leukemiaChronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
) mutation.Chronic neutrophilic leukemiaChronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) is characterized by a mutation in the CSF3R gene and an exclusion of other causes of neutrophilia.Essential thrombocythemiaEssential thrombocythemia (ET) is diagnosed with a platelet count greater than 450 × 109/L and
platelet count greater than 450 × 109/L and is associated with the JAK2 V617F mutation in up to 55% of cases and with an MPL (thrombopoietin receptor) mutation in up to 5% of cases:. There should be no increase in reticulin
with the JAK2 V617F mutation in up to 55% of cases and with an MPL (thrombopoietin receptor) mutation in up to 5% of cases:. There should be no increase in reticulin fibers and the patient should not meet the criteria for other MPNs, in particular Pre
MPNs, in particular Pre-PMF.Polycythemia veraPolycythemia vera (PV) is associated most often with the JAK2 V617F mutation in greater than 95% of cases, whereas the remainder have a JAK2 exon 12 mutation. High hemoglobin or hematocrit counts are required, as is a bone marrow examination
of the other categories.No curative drug treatment exists for MPNs. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can be a curative treatment for a small group of patients, however MPN treatment is typically focused on symptom control and myelosuppressive drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of
curative treatment for a small group of patients, however MPN treatment is typically focused on symptom control and myelosuppressive drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of
of patients, however MPN treatment is typically focused on symptom control and myelosuppressive drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of anemia, splenomegaly, and other
drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of anemia, splenomegaly, and other symptoms. Low-dose aspirin is effective in PV and ET. Tyrosine
of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of anemia, splenomegaly, and other symptoms. Low-dose aspirin is effective in PV and ET. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors like imatinib have improved
primary myelofibrosis. Trials of these inhibitors are in progress for the treatment of the other myeloproliferative neoplasms.Although considered rare diseases, incidence rates of MPNs are increasing, in some cases tripling. It is hypothesized that the increase may be related to improved diagnostic abilities from the identification of
thrombocythemia and primary myelofibrosis.The concept of myeloproliferative disease was first proposed in 1951 by the hematologist William Dameshek.The discovery of the association of MPNs with the JAK2 gene marker in 2005 and the CALR marker in 2013 improved the ability to classify MPNs.MPNs were classified as blood
called carcinoid tumors, but they are also found in the pancreas, lung and the rest of the body.Although there are many kinds of NETs, they are treated as a group of tissue because the cells of these neoplasms share common features, such as looking similar, having
in the pancreas, lung and the rest of the body.Although there are many kinds of NETs, they are treated as a group of tissue because the cells of these neoplasms share common features, such as looking similar, having special secretory granules, and often producing biogenic amines
depends on well-defined histological features: size, lymphovascular invasion, mitotic counts, Ki-67 labelling index, invasion of adjacent organs, presence of metastases and whether they produce hormones.Traditionally, neuroendocrine tumors have been classified by their anatomic site of origin. NETs can arise in many
, invasion of adjacent organs, presence of metastases and whether they produce hormones.Traditionally, neuroendocrine tumors have been classified by their anatomic site of origin. NETs can arise in many different areas of the body, and are most often located in the intestine, pancreas or the lungs
arise in many different areas of the body, and are most often located in the intestine, pancreas or the lungs. The various kinds of cells that can give rise to NETs are present in endocrine glands and are also diffusely distributed throughout the body, most commonly Kulchitsky cells or
tumorsPheochromocytomaPeripheral nervous system tumors, such as:SchwannomaparagangliomaneuroblastomaBreastGenitourinary tracturinary tract carcinoid tumor and neuroendocrine carcinomaovaryneuroendocrine tumor of the cervixProstate tumor with neuroendocrine differentiationtestesMerkel cell carcinoma of skin (trabecular cancer)Several inherited conditions:multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1)multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2)von Hippel-Lindau (VHL)
secreting hormones.Ten per cent (10%) or less of carcinoids, primarily some midgut carcinoids, secrete excessive levels of a range of hormones, most notably serotonin (5-HT) or substance P, causing a constellation of symptoms called carcinoid syndrome:flushingdiarrheaasthma or wheezingcongestive
carcinoids, secrete excessive levels of a range of hormones, most notably serotonin (5-HT) or substance P, causing a constellation of symptoms called carcinoid syndrome:flushingdiarrheaasthma or wheezingcongestive heart failure (CHF)abdominal crampingperipheral edemaheart palpitationsA carcinoid crisis with profound flushing, bronchospasm, tachycardia, and
CHF)abdominal crampingperipheral edemaheart palpitationsA carcinoid crisis with profound flushing, bronchospasm, tachycardia, and widely and rapidly fluctuating blood pressure can occur if large amounts of hormone are acutely secreted, which is occasionally triggered by factors such as diet, alcohol, surgery chemotherapy, embolization therapy or radiofrequency ablation.
which is occasionally triggered by factors such as diet, alcohol, surgery chemotherapy, embolization therapy or radiofrequency ablation.Chronic exposure to high levels of serotonin causes thickening of the heart valves, particularly the tricuspid and the pulmonic valves, and over a long period can lead to congestive heart
pulmonic valves, and over a long period can lead to congestive heart failure. However, valve replacement is rarely needed. The excessive outflow of serotonin can cause a depletion of tryptophan leading to niacin deficiency, and thus pellagra, which is associated with dermatitis, dementia, and diarrhea
long period can lead to congestive heart failure. However, valve replacement is rarely needed. The excessive outflow of serotonin can cause a depletion of tryptophan leading to niacin deficiency, and thus pellagra, which is associated with dermatitis, dementia, and diarrhea. Many other hormones can be
, most commonly growth hormone that can cause acromegaly, or cortisol, that can cause Cushing's syndrome.Occasionally, haemorrhage or the effects of tumor bulk are the presenting symptoms. Bowel obstruction can occur, sometimes due to fibrosing effects of NET secretory products with an intense desmoplastic reaction
syndrome.Occasionally, haemorrhage or the effects of tumor bulk are the presenting symptoms. Bowel obstruction can occur, sometimes due to fibrosing effects of NET secretory products with an intense desmoplastic reaction at the tumor site, or of the mesentery. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs
or "pancreatic endocrine tumors"The PanNET denomination is in line with current WHO guidelines. Historically, PanNETs have also been referred to by a variety of terms, and are still often called "islet cell tumors" or "pancreatic endocrine tumors". originate within the pancreas. PanNETs are
is more aggressive. Up to 60% of PanNETs are nonsecretory or nonfunctional, which either don’t secrete, or the quantity or type of products such as pancreatic polypeptide (PPoma), chromogranin A, and neurotensin do not cause a clinical syndrome, although blood levels may be
in the tumor. Secretory activity of the tumor cells is sometimes dissimilar to the tissue immunoreactivity to particular hormones.Given the diverse secretory activity of NETs there are many other potential markers, but a limited panel is usually sufficient for clinical purposes. Aside from the hormones of secretory tumors
), and endoscopy (including endoscopic ultrasound) are commonly used. Multiphase CT and MRI are typically used both for diagnostics and for evaluation of therapy. The multiphase CT should be performed before and after an intravenous injection of an iodine-based contrast agent, both in the late
phase (triple-phase study). While MRI is generally superior to CT, both for detection of the primary tumor and for evaluation of metastases, CECT is more widely available, even at academic institutions. Therefore, multiphase CT is often the modality of choice.Advances in
tumor and for evaluation of metastases, CECT is more widely available, even at academic institutions. Therefore, multiphase CT is often the modality of choice.Advances in nuclear medicine imaging, also known as molecular imaging, has improved diagnostic and treatment paradigms in patients with neuroendocrine tumors.
molecular imaging, has improved diagnostic and treatment paradigms in patients with neuroendocrine tumors. This is because of its ability to not only identify sites of disease but also characterize them. Neuronedocrine tumours express somatostatin receptors providing a unique target for imaging. Octreotide is a synthetic modifications of somatostatin with
identify sites of disease but also characterize them. Neuronedocrine tumours express somatostatin receptors providing a unique target for imaging. Octreotide is a synthetic modifications of somatostatin with a longer half-life. OctreoScan, also called somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS or SSRS), utilizes intravenously administered octreotide that
.Functional imaging with Gallium-labelled somatostatin analog and 18F-FDG PET tracers ensures better staging and prognostication of neuroendocrine neoplasms.The combination of somatostatin receptor and FDG PET imaging is able to quantify somatostatin receptor cell surface (SSTR) expression and glycolytic metabolism, respectively. The ability
skin in the face and upper neck.  These tumors can metastasize to bone.Midgut NETs are argentaffin positive, can produce high levels of serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), kinins, prostaglandins, substance P (SP), and other vasoactive peptides, and
years.Detailed guidelines for managing neuroendocrine tumors are available from ESMO, NCCN and a UK panel. The NCI has guidelines for several categories of NET: islet cell tumors of the pancreas, gastrointestinal carcinoids, Merkel cell tumors and pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma.Even if the tumor has advanced
paraganglioma.Even if the tumor has advanced and metastasized, making curative surgery infeasible, surgery often has a role in neuroendocrine cancers for palliation of symptoms and possibly increased lifespan.Cholecystectomy is recommended if there is a consideration of long-term treatment with somatostatin analogs.In secretory tumors
Placebo-controlled prospective randomized study on the antiproliferative efficacy of Octreotide LAR in patients with metastatic neuroendocrine MIDgut tumors): at least in this subset of NETs, average tumor stabilization was 14.3 months compared to 6 months for placebo.The CLARINET study (a randomized, double-blind,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study on the antiproliferative effects of lanreotide in patients with enteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors) further demonstrated the antiproliferative potential of lanreotide, a somatostatin analog and recently approved FDA treatment for GEP-NETS. In this study, lanreotide showed a statistically significant improvement in
this study, lanreotide showed a statistically significant improvement in progression-free survival, meeting its primary endpoint. The disease in sixty five percent of patients treated with lanreotide in the study had not progressed or caused death at 96 weeks, the same was true of 33% of patients
percent of patients treated with lanreotide in the study had not progressed or caused death at 96 weeks, the same was true of 33% of patients on placebo. This represented a 53% reduction in risk of disease progression or death with lanreotide based on a hazard ratio of .47.Lanreotide
caused death at 96 weeks, the same was true of 33% of patients on placebo. This represented a 53% reduction in risk of disease progression or death with lanreotide based on a hazard ratio of .47.Lanreotide is the first and only FDA approved antitumor therapy demonstrating a statistically significant
hazard ratio of .47.Lanreotide is the first and only FDA approved antitumor therapy demonstrating a statistically significant progression-free survival benefit in a combined population of patients with GEP-NETS.Other medications that block particular secretory effects can sometimes relieve symptoms.Interferon is sometimes used to treat GEP-NETs.
well-differentiated PETs, cisplatin with etoposide is active in poorly differentiated neuroendocrine cancers (PDNECs).Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) is a type of radioisotope therapy (RIT) in which a peptide or hormone conjugated to a radionuclide or radioligand is given intravenously, the peptide or neuroamine hormone
, the peptide or neuroamine hormone previously having shown good uptake of a tracer dose, using Somatostatin receptor imaging as detailed above. This type of radiotherapy is a systemic therapy and will impact somatostatin positive disease. The peptide receptor may be bound to lutetium-177, yttrium-90, indium-111 and other
. The mechanical targeting delivers the radiation from the yttrium-labeled microspheres selectively to the tumors without unduly affecting the normal liver. This type of treatment is FDA approved for liver metastases secondary to colorectal carcinoma and is under investigation for treatment of other liver malignancies, including neuroendocrine malignancies.
endothermic substance is injected into the tumors to kill by freezing. Cryoablation has been less successful for GEP-NETs than RFA.AdVince, a type of gene therapy using a genetically modified oncolytic adenovirus and supported by the crowdfunding campaign iCancer was used in a Phase 1 trial against NET in 2016.Although
small bowel tumors could be malignant. Despite the differences between these two original categories, and further complexities due to subsequent inclusion of other NETs of pancreas and pulmonary origin, all NETs are sometimes (incorrectly) subsumed into the term "carcinoid".Enterochromaffin cells, which give rise to
into the term "carcinoid".Enterochromaffin cells, which give rise to carcinoid tumors, were identified in 1897 by Nikolai Kulchitsky and their secretion of serotonin was established in 1953 when the "flushing" effect of serotonin had become clinically recognized. Carcinoid heart disease was identified in 1952,
to carcinoid tumors, were identified in 1897 by Nikolai Kulchitsky and their secretion of serotonin was established in 1953 when the "flushing" effect of serotonin had become clinically recognized. Carcinoid heart disease was identified in 1952, and carcinoid fibrosis in 1961.Neuroendocrine tumors were sometimes called APUDomas because these
behavior was also part of the disproven hypothesis that these cells might all embryologically arise from the neural crest, neuroendocrine cells sometimes produce various types of hormones and amines, and they can also have strong receptors for other hormones to which they respond.There have been multiple nomenclature systems for

may not be serious, it may also indicate the presence of cervical cancer.Human papillomavirus infection (HPV) causes more than 90% of cases; most people who have had HPV infections, however, do not develop cervical cancer. Other risk factors include smoking, a weak
then done to determine whether or not the cancer has spread.HPV vaccines protect against two to seven high-risk strains of this family of viruses and may prevent up to 90% of cervical cancers. As a risk of cancer still exists, guidelines recommend continuing regular Pap tests
two to seven high-risk strains of this family of viruses and may prevent up to 90% of cervical cancers. As a risk of cancer still exists, guidelines recommend continuing regular Pap tests. Other methods of prevention include having few or no sexual partners and the use of
prevent up to 90% of cervical cancers. As a risk of cancer still exists, guidelines recommend continuing regular Pap tests. Other methods of prevention include having few or no sexual partners and the use of condoms. Cervical cancer screening using the Pap test or acetic acid can identify
of cancer still exists, guidelines recommend continuing regular Pap tests. Other methods of prevention include having few or no sexual partners and the use of condoms. Cervical cancer screening using the Pap test or acetic acid can identify precancerous changes, which when treated, can prevent the development of
of condoms. Cervical cancer screening using the Pap test or acetic acid can identify precancerous changes, which when treated, can prevent the development of cancer. Treatment may consist of some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. Five-year survival rates in the United States
test or acetic acid can identify precancerous changes, which when treated, can prevent the development of cancer. Treatment may consist of some combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. Five-year survival rates in the United States are 68%. Outcomes, however, depend
, however, depend very much on how early the cancer is detected.Worldwide, cervical cancer is both the fourth-most common cause of cancer and the fourth-most common cause of death from cancer in women. In 2012, an estimated 528,000 cases of cervical cancer occurred
the cancer is detected.Worldwide, cervical cancer is both the fourth-most common cause of cancer and the fourth-most common cause of death from cancer in women. In 2012, an estimated 528,000 cases of cervical cancer occurred, with 266,000 deaths. This is about 8
deaths. This is about 8% of the total cases and total deaths from cancer. About 70% of cervical cancers and 90% of deaths occur in developing countries. In low-income countries, it is one of the most common causes of cancer death. In developed
cervical cancers and 90% of deaths occur in developing countries. In low-income countries, it is one of the most common causes of cancer death. In developed countries, the widespread use of cervical screening programs has dramatically reduced rates of cervical cancer. In medical research,
, contact bleeding (one most common form being bleeding after sexual intercourse), or (rarely) a vaginal mass may indicate the presence of malignancy. Also, moderate pain during sexual intercourse and vaginal discharge are symptoms of cervical cancer. In advanced disease, metastases may be present
In advanced disease, metastases may be present in the abdomen, lungs, or elsewhere.Symptoms of advanced cervical cancer may include: loss of appetite, weight loss, fatigue, pelvic pain, back pain, leg pain, swollen legs, heavy vaginal bleeding, bone fractures,
fatigue, pelvic pain, back pain, leg pain, swollen legs, heavy vaginal bleeding, bone fractures, and (rarely) leakage of urine or feces from the vagina. Bleeding after douching or after a pelvic exam is a common symptom of cervical cancer.Infection with some
. Although smoking has been linked to cervical cancer, it aids in the development of HPV, which is the leading cause of this type of cancer. Also, not only does it aid in the development of HPV, but also if the woman is already HPV-positive,
cervical cancer. Among HPV-infected women, those who have had seven or more full-term pregnancies have around four times the risk of cancer compared with women with no pregnancies, and two to three times the risk of women who have had one or two full-term
full-term pregnancies have around four times the risk of cancer compared with women with no pregnancies, and two to three times the risk of women who have had one or two full-term pregnancies.The Pap test can be used as a screening test, but produces a
full-term pregnancies.The Pap test can be used as a screening test, but produces a false negative in up to 50% of cases of cervical cancer. Other concerns is the cost of doing Pap tests, which make them unaffordable in many areas of the world.
tissues a mahogany brown with Lugol's iodine. Medical devices used for biopsy of the cervix include punch forceps. Colposcopic impression, the estimate of disease severity based on the visual inspection, forms part of the diagnosis. Further diagnostic and treatment procedures are loop electrical excision procedure and cervical
out if the biopsy confirms severe cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.Often before the biopsy, the doctor asks for medical imaging to rule out other causes of woman's symptoms. Imaging modalities such as ultrasound, CT scan, and MRI have been used to look for alternating disease, spread of
the biopsy confirms severe cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.Often before the biopsy, the doctor asks for medical imaging to rule out other causes of woman's symptoms. Imaging modalities such as ultrasound, CT scan, and MRI have been used to look for alternating disease, spread of the tumor
dysplasia or carcinoma in situ (CIS).  The term cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) was developed to place emphasis on the spectrum of abnormality in these lesions, and to help standardize treatment.  It classifies mild dysplasia as CIN1, moderate dysplasia as CIN2, and severe
findings.Histologic subtypes of invasive cervical carcinoma include:  Though squamous cell carcinoma is the cervical cancer with the most incidence, the incidence of adenocarcinoma of the cervix has been increasing in recent decades. Endocervical adenocarcinoma represents 20–25% of the histological types of cervical carcinoma. Gastric-
. Endocervical adenocarcinoma represents 20–25% of the histological types of cervical carcinoma. Gastric-type mucinous adenocarcinoma of the cervix is a rare type of cancer with aggressive behavior. This type of malignancy is not related to high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV).Squamous cell carcinoma (about 80–85%)adenocarcinoma (
histological types of cervical carcinoma. Gastric-type mucinous adenocarcinoma of the cervix is a rare type of cancer with aggressive behavior. This type of malignancy is not related to high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV).Squamous cell carcinoma (about 80–85%)adenocarcinoma (about 15% of cervical cancers in the
and cervical conization.												Checking cervical cells with the Papanicolaou test (Pap test) for cervical pre-cancer has dramatically reduced the number of cases of, and mortality from, cervical cancer. Liquid-based cytology may reduced the number of inadequate samples. Pap test screening every
not as effective as invitations.According to the 2010 European guidelines, the age at which to start screening ranges between 20 and 30 years of age, but preferentially not before age 25 or 30 years, and depends on burden of the disease in the population and the available resources
testing every 5 years, or HPV testing together with cytology every 5 years. Screening is not beneficial before age 25, as the rate of disease is low. Screening is not beneficial in women older than 60 years if they have a history of negative results. The American Society
women older than 60 years if they have a history of negative results. The American Society of Clinical Oncology guideline has recommend for different levels of resource availability.Pap tests have not been as effective in developing countries. This is in part because many of these countries have an impoverished
.HPV vaccines are typically given to age 9 to 26, as the vaccine is most effective if given before infection occurs. The duration of effectiveness and whether a booster will be needed is unknown. The high cost of this vaccine has been a cause for concern. Several countries
countries have considered (or are considering) programs to fund HPV vaccination. The American Society of Clinical Oncology guideline has recommendations for different levels of resource availability.Since 2010, young women in Japan have been eligible to receive the cervical cancer vaccination for free. In June 2013,
-Carotene.The treatment of cervical cancer varies worldwide, largely due to access to surgeons skilled in radical pelvic surgery, and the emergence of fertility-sparing therapy in developed nations. Less advanced stages of cervical cancer typically have treatment options that allow fertility to be maintained, if
cervical cancer, and has been found to be more effective than radiation alone. Evidence suggests chemoradiotherapy may increase overall survival and reduce the risk of disease recurrence compared to radiotherapy alone.  Peri-operative care approaches, such as 'fast-track surgery' or 'enhanced recovery
It is a viable option for those in stage I cervical cancer which has not spread; however, it is not yet considered a standard of care, as few doctors are skilled in this procedure. Even the most experienced surgeon cannot promise that a trachelectomy can be performed until
Even the most experienced surgeon cannot promise that a trachelectomy can be performed until after surgical microscopic examination, as the extent of the spread of cancer is unknown. If the surgeon is not able to microscopically confirm clear margins of cervical tissue once the woman is under general anesthesia in
still be needed. This can only be done during the same operation if the woman has given prior consent. Due to the possible risk of cancer spread to the lymph nodes in stage 1B cancers and some stage 1A cancers, the surgeon may also need to remove some lymph nodes
Women treated with surgery who have high-risk features found on pathologic examination are given radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy to reduce the risk of relapse.  A Cochrane review has found moderate-certainty evidence that radiation decreases the risk of disease progression in people with stage IB cervical
with or without chemotherapy to reduce the risk of relapse.  A Cochrane review has found moderate-certainty evidence that radiation decreases the risk of disease progression in people with stage IB cervical cancer, when compared to no further treatment. However, little evidence was found on its effects
chemotherapy followed by hysterectomy. When cisplatin is present, it is thought to be the most active single agent in periodic diseases. Such addition of platinum-based chemotherapy to chemoradiation seems not only to improve survival but also reduces risk of recurrence in women with early stage cervical cancer (
active single agent in periodic diseases. Such addition of platinum-based chemotherapy to chemoradiation seems not only to improve survival but also reduces risk of recurrence in women with early stage cervical cancer (IA2-IIA). A Cochrane review found a lack of evidence on the benefits and
survival but also reduces risk of recurrence in women with early stage cervical cancer (IA2-IIA). A Cochrane review found a lack of evidence on the benefits and harms of primary hysterectomy compared to primary chemoradiotherapy for cervical cancer in stage IB2.Advanced-stage tumors (IIB-IVA
two chemotherapy drugs, hycamtin and cisplatin, for women with late-stage (IVB) cervical cancer treatment. Combination treatment has significant risk of neutropenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia side effects.There is insufficient evidence whether anticancer drugs after standard care help women with locally advanced cervical cancer
exenteration.No evidence is available to suggest that any form of follow‐up approach is better or worse in terms of prolonging survival, improving quality of life or guiding the management of problems that can arise because of the treatment and that in the case of radiotherapy treatment worsen with time.
to suggest that any form of follow‐up approach is better or worse in terms of prolonging survival, improving quality of life or guiding the management of problems that can arise because of the treatment and that in the case of radiotherapy treatment worsen with time. A 2019 review found no controlled
of prolonging survival, improving quality of life or guiding the management of problems that can arise because of the treatment and that in the case of radiotherapy treatment worsen with time. A 2019 review found no controlled trials regarding the efficacy and safety of interventions for vaginal bleeding in women with
the treatment and that in the case of radiotherapy treatment worsen with time. A 2019 review found no controlled trials regarding the efficacy and safety of interventions for vaginal bleeding in women with advanced cervical cancer.				Prognosis depends on the stage of the cancer. The chance of a survival
. These statistics may be improved when applied to women newly diagnosed, bearing in mind that these outcomes may be partly based on the state of treatment five years ago when the women studied were first diagnosed.With treatment, 80–90% of women with stage I cancer and 60–75%
outcomes may be partly based on the state of treatment five years ago when the women studied were first diagnosed.With treatment, 80–90% of women with stage I cancer and 60–75% of those with stage II cancer are alive 5 years after diagnosis. Survival rates decrease to 30–40
detected at its earliest stages might be successfully treated with surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or a combination of the three. About 35% of women with invasive cervical cancer have persistent or recurrent disease after treatment.Five year survival in the United States for White women is 69%
integrated into clinical practice in the Nordic countries in the 1960s.In Africa outcomes are often worse as diagnosis is frequently at a latter stage of disease.Worldwide, cervical cancer is both the fourth-most common cause of cancer and deaths from cancer in women. In 2018,
are often worse as diagnosis is frequently at a latter stage of disease.Worldwide, cervical cancer is both the fourth-most common cause of cancer and deaths from cancer in women. In 2018, 570,000 cases of cervical cancer were estimated to have occurred, with over 300,000 deaths
2018, 570,000 cases of cervical cancer were estimated to have occurred, with over 300,000 deaths. It is the second-most common cause of female-specific cancer after breast cancer, accounting for around 8% of both total cancer cases and total cancer deaths in women. About
, with an occurrence of 1.5 to 12 for every 100,000 pregnancies.Australia had 734 cases of cervical cancer in 2005.  The number of women diagnosed with cervical cancer has dropped on average by 4.5% each year since organised screening began in 1991 (1991–2005). Regular twice
Canada, an estimated 1,300 women will have been diagnosed with cervical cancer in 2008 and 380 will have died.In India, the number of people with cervical cancer is rising, but overall the age-adjusted rates are decreasing.  Usage of condoms in the female population has
.In India, the number of people with cervical cancer is rising, but overall the age-adjusted rates are decreasing.  Usage of condoms in the female population has improved the survival of women with cancers of the cervix.In the European Union, about 34,000 new cases
cancer is rising, but overall the age-adjusted rates are decreasing.  Usage of condoms in the female population has improved the survival of women with cancers of the cervix.In the European Union, about 34,000 new cases per year and over 16,000 deaths due to cervical cancer
most common cancer in women in the UK (around 3,100 women were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and accounts for 1% of cancer deaths (around 920 died in 2012). With a 42% reduction from 1988 to 1997, the NHS-implemented screening programme
in nuns, except for those who had been sexually active before entering the convent (Rigoni in 1841).It was more common in the second wives of men whose first wives had died from cervical cancer.It was rare in Jewish women.In 1935, Syverton and Berry discovered a relationship
, under backing from the World Health Assembly, set out a strategy to eliminate cervical cancer by 2050. The strategy involves vaccinating 90% of girls by the age of 15, screening 70% of women by the age of 35 and again by the age of 45, and
a strategy to eliminate cervical cancer by 2050. The strategy involves vaccinating 90% of girls by the age of 15, screening 70% of women by the age of 35 and again by the age of 45, and treating 90% of women identified with cervical disease.In
age of 15, screening 70% of women by the age of 35 and again by the age of 45, and treating 90% of women identified with cervical disease.In Australia, Aboriginal women are more than five times more likely to die from cervical cancer than non-
and trained female Aboriginal Health Workers are also issues.The Australian Cervical Cancer Foundation (ACCF), founded in 2008, promotes 'women's health by eliminating cervical cancer and enabling treatment for women with cervical cancer and related health issues, in Australia and in developing countries.'
However, there is a deficiency that is compensated for by the perpendicular plate of the palatine bone, the medial pterygoid plate, the labyrinth of ethmoid and the inferior concha.  The paranasal sinuses are connected to the nasal cavity through small orifices called ostia. Most of these ostia
the roof of each nasal cavity and the medial side of each middle turbinate.  Histological sections appear yellowish-brown due to the presence of lipofuscin pigments.  Olfactory mucosal cell types include bipolar neurons, supporting (sustentacular) cells, basal cells, and Bowman's glands.
, a branch of the facial artery, which supplies the vestibule of the nasal cavity.Innervation of the nasal cavity responsible for the sense of smell is via the olfactory nerve, which sends microscopic fibers from the olfactory bulb through the cribriform plate to reach the top of the nasal
V2)The nasal cavity is innervated by autonomic fibers. Sympathetic innervation to the blood vessels of the mucosa causes them to constrict, while the control of secretion by the mucous glands is carried on postganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers originating from the facial nerve.The two nasal cavities condition the air to
by the nasal conchae (also known as turbinates), the air passing through the nasal cavity is warmed or cooled to within 1 degree of body temperature. In addition, the air is humidified, and dust and other particulate matter is removed by nasal hair in the nostrils.
dust and other particulate matter is removed by nasal hair in the nostrils. The entire mucosa of the nasal cavity is covered by a blanket of mucus, which lies superficial to the microscopic cilia and also filters inspired air. The cilia of the respiratory epithelium move the secreted mucus and
particulate matter posteriorly towards the pharynx where it passes into the esophagus and is digested in the stomach. The nasal cavity also houses the sense of smell and contributes greatly to taste sensation through its posterior communication with the mouth via the choanae.Diseases of the nasal cavity include viral,

and some tissue groups' status as one is debated. Since there is no single standard definition of what an organ is, the number of organs varies depending on how one defines an organ. For example, this list contains much more than 79 different organs.Human skeletonJointsLigamentsMuscular systemTendons
than 79 different organs.Human skeletonJointsLigamentsMuscular systemTendons=Salivary glandsParotid glandsSubmandibular glandsSublingual glandsPharynxEsophagusStomachSmall intestineDuodenumJejunumIleumLarge intestineCecumAscending colonTransverse colonDescending colonSigmoid colonRectumLiverGallbladderMesenteryPancreasAnal canalNasal cavityPharynxLarynxTracheaBronchiBronchioles and smaller air passagesLungsMuscles of breathingKidneysUreterBladderUrethraInternal reproductive organsOvariesFallopian tubesUterusCervixVaginaExternal reproductive organsVulvaClitorisPlacentaInternal reproductive organsTestesEpididymisVas deferensSeminal vesiclesProstateBulbourethral glandsExternal reproductive organsPenisScrotumPituitary glandPineal glandThyroid glandParathyroid glandsAdrenal glandsPancreasHeartPatent Foramen OvaleArteriesVeinsCapillariesLymphatic vesselLymph nodeBone marrowThymusSpleenGut-associated lymphoid


the lining of the abdomen and rarely the sac surrounding the heart, or the sac surrounding the testis may be affected. Signs and symptoms of mesothelioma may include shortness of breath due to fluid around the lung, a swollen abdomen, chest wall pain, cough, feeling tired,
and rarely the sac surrounding the heart, or the sac surrounding the testis may be affected. Signs and symptoms of mesothelioma may include shortness of breath due to fluid around the lung, a swollen abdomen, chest wall pain, cough, feeling tired, and weight loss. These
abdomen, chest wall pain, cough, feeling tired, and weight loss. These symptoms typically come on slowly.More than 80% of mesothelioma cases are caused by exposure to asbestos. The greater the exposure the greater the risk. As of 2013, about 125 million people
the exposure the greater the risk. As of 2013, about 125 million people worldwide have been exposed to asbestos at work. High rates of disease occur in people who mine asbestos, produce products from asbestos, work with asbestos products, live with asbestos workers, or work in
products from asbestos, work with asbestos products, live with asbestos workers, or work in buildings containing asbestos. Asbestos exposure and the onset of cancer are generally separated by about 40 years. Washing the clothing of someone who worked with asbestos also increases the risk. Other risk factors
, may be used to prevent more fluid from building up around the lungs. Chemotherapy often includes the medications cisplatin and pemetrexed. The percentage of people that survive five years following diagnosis is on average 8% in the United States.In 2015, about 60,800 people had mesothelioma,
on average 8% in the United States.In 2015, about 60,800 people had mesothelioma, and 32,000 died from the disease. Rates of mesothelioma vary in different areas of the world. Rates are higher in Australia, the United Kingdom, and lower in Japan. It occurs
in Japan. It occurs in about 3,000 people per year in the United States. It occurs more often in males than females. Rates of disease have increased since the 1950s. Diagnosis typically occurs after the age of 65 and most deaths occur around 70 years old. The disease
. Diagnosis typically occurs after the age of 65 and most deaths occur around 70 years old. The disease was rare before the commercial use of asbestos.Symptoms or signs of mesothelioma may not appear until 20 to 50 years (or more) after exposure to asbestos. Shortness of
age of 65 and most deaths occur around 70 years old. The disease was rare before the commercial use of asbestos.Symptoms or signs of mesothelioma may not appear until 20 to 50 years (or more) after exposure to asbestos. Shortness of breath, cough, and pain
of asbestos.Symptoms or signs of mesothelioma may not appear until 20 to 50 years (or more) after exposure to asbestos. Shortness of breath, cough, and pain in the chest due to an accumulation of fluid in the pleural space (pleural effusion) are often symptoms
50 years (or more) after exposure to asbestos. Shortness of breath, cough, and pain in the chest due to an accumulation of fluid in the pleural space (pleural effusion) are often symptoms of pleural mesothelioma.Mesothelioma that affects the pleura can cause these signs and
of pleural mesothelioma.Mesothelioma that affects the pleura can cause these signs and symptoms:Chest wall painPleural effusion, or fluid surrounding the lungShortness of breath – which could be due to a collapsed lungFatigue or anemiaWheezing, hoarseness, or a coughBlood in the sputum (fluid) coughed up
or spread to other parts of the body.The most common symptoms of peritoneal mesothelioma are abdominal swelling andpain due to ascites (a buildup of fluid in the abdominal cavity). Other features may include weight loss, fever, night sweats, poor appetite, vomiting, constipation,
the abdominal cavity often do not cause symptoms until they are at a late stage. Symptoms include:Abdominal painAscites, or an abnormal buildup of fluid in the abdomenA mass in the abdomenProblems with bowel functionWeight lossPericardial mesothelioma is not well characterized, but observed cases have included cardiac symptoms,
, heart failure, pulmonary embolism, and cardiac tamponade. They have also included nonspecific symptoms, including substernal chest pain, orthopnea (shortness of breath when lying flat), and cough. These symptoms are caused by the tumor encasing or infiltrating the heart.In severe cases of
has been reported in some individuals without any known exposure to asbestos. Tentative evidence also raises concern about carbon-fibre nanotubes.The incidence of mesothelioma has been found to be higher in populations living near naturally occurring asbestos. People can be exposed to naturally occurring asbestos in areas where
occurring asbestos in areas where mining or road construction is occurring, or when the asbestos-containing rock is naturally weathered. Another common route of exposure is through asbestos-containing soil, which is used to whitewash, plaster, and roof houses in Greece. In central Cappadocia,
times more than expected in asbestos-free populations, and was associated with very frequent pleural calcification known as Metsovo lung.The documented presence of asbestos fibers in water supplies and food products has fostered concerns about the possible impact of long-term and, as yet, unknown exposure
.In the United States, asbestos is considered the major cause of malignant mesothelioma and has been considered "indisputably" associated with the development of mesothelioma.  Indeed, the relationship between asbestos and mesothelioma is so strong that many consider mesothelioma a "signal" or "sentinel"
, the relationship between asbestos and mesothelioma is so strong that many consider mesothelioma a "signal" or "sentinel" tumor. A history of asbestos exposure exists in most cases.Pericardial mesothelioma may not be associated with asbestos exposure.Asbestos was known in antiquity, but it was
(e.g., Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard), shipyard workers, people who work in asbestos mines and mills, producers of asbestos products, workers in the heating and construction industries, and other tradespeople. Today, the official position of the U.S. Occupational Safety and
"safe" threshold exists. Others have noted as well that there is no evidence of a threshold level below which there is no risk of mesothelioma. There appears to be a linear, dose–response relationship, with increasing dose producing increasing risk of disease. Nevertheless, mesothelioma
which there is no risk of mesothelioma. There appears to be a linear, dose–response relationship, with increasing dose producing increasing risk of disease. Nevertheless, mesothelioma may be related to brief, low level or indirect exposures to asbestos. The dose necessary for effect appears to
appears to be lower for asbestos-induced mesothelioma than for pulmonary asbestosis or lung cancer.  Again, there is no known safe level of exposure to asbestos as it relates to increased risk of mesothelioma.The time from first exposure to onset of the disease, is between 25
for pulmonary asbestosis or lung cancer.  Again, there is no known safe level of exposure to asbestos as it relates to increased risk of mesothelioma.The time from first exposure to onset of the disease, is between 25 and 70 years. It is virtually never less than
the disease, is between 25 and 70 years. It is virtually never less than fifteen years and peaks at 30–40 years. The duration of exposure to asbestos causing mesothelioma can be short. For example, cases of mesothelioma have been documented with only 1–3 months of exposure. Occupational
less than fifteen years and peaks at 30–40 years. The duration of exposure to asbestos causing mesothelioma can be short. For example, cases of mesothelioma have been documented with only 1–3 months of exposure. Occupational Exposure to asbestos fibers has been recognized as an occupational health hazard since the
. The duration of exposure to asbestos causing mesothelioma can be short. For example, cases of mesothelioma have been documented with only 1–3 months of exposure. Occupational Exposure to asbestos fibers has been recognized as an occupational health hazard since the early 20th century. Numerous epidemiological studies have associated
products, textiles, and insulation.Commercial asbestos mining at Wittenoom, Western Australia, took place from 1937 to 1966. The first case of mesothelioma in the town occurred in 1960. The second case was in 1969, and new cases began to appear more frequently thereafter. The
case was in 1969, and new cases began to appear more frequently thereafter. The lag time between initial exposure to asbestos and the development of mesothelioma varied from 12 years 9 months up to 58 years. A cohort study of miners employed at the mine reported that 85 deaths attributable
lag time between initial exposure to asbestos and the development of mesothelioma varied from 12 years 9 months up to 58 years. A cohort study of miners employed at the mine reported that 85 deaths attributable to mesothelioma had occurred by 1985. By 1994, 539 reported deaths due to mesothelioma
living with asbestos workers have an increased risk of developing mesothelioma, and possibly other asbestos-related diseases. This risk may be the result of exposure to asbestos dust brought home on the clothing and hair of asbestos workers via washing a worker's clothes or coming into contact with asbestos
and possibly other asbestos-related diseases. This risk may be the result of exposure to asbestos dust brought home on the clothing and hair of asbestos workers via washing a worker's clothes or coming into contact with asbestos-contaminated work clothing. To reduce the chance of exposing family
. This risk may be the result of exposure to asbestos dust brought home on the clothing and hair of asbestos workers via washing a worker's clothes or coming into contact with asbestos-contaminated work clothing. To reduce the chance of exposing family members to asbestos fibres, asbestos workers
and change their clothing before leaving the workplace. Asbestos in buildings Many building materials used in both public and domestic premises prior to the banning of asbestos may contain asbestos. Those performing renovation works or DIY activities may expose themselves to asbestos dust. In the UK, use of chrysotile
banning of asbestos may contain asbestos. Those performing renovation works or DIY activities may expose themselves to asbestos dust. In the UK, use of chrysotile asbestos was banned at the end of 1999. Brown and blue asbestos were banned in the UK around 1985. Buildings built or renovated
silicates, such as erionite or talc. Some studies suggest that simian virus 40 (SV40) may act as a cofactor in the development of mesothelioma. This has been confirmed in animal studies, but studies in humans are inconclusive.The mesothelium consists of a single layer of flattened
of flattened to cuboidal cells forming the epithelial lining of the serous cavities of the body including the peritoneal, pericardial and pleural cavities. Deposition of asbestos fibers in the parenchyma of the lung may result in the penetration of the visceral pleura from where the fiber can then be carried to
lung are transported to the abdomen and associated organs via the lymphatic system. Additionally, asbestos fibers may be deposited in the gut after ingestion of sputum contaminated with asbestos fibers.Pleural contamination with asbestos or other mineral fibers has been shown to cause cancer. Long thin asbestos fibers (
inhaled, and may penetrate more easily and deeper into the lungs. "We probably will find out a lot more about the health aspects of asbestos from [the World Trade Center attack], unfortunately," said Dr. Alan Fein, chief of pulmonary and critical-care medicine
Mesothelioma development in rats has been demonstrated following intra-pleural inoculation of phosphorylated chrysotile fibers. It has been suggested that in humans, transport of fibers to the pleura is critical to the pathogenesis of mesothelioma. This is supported by the observed recruitment of significant numbers of macrophages and other
pleural inoculation of phosphorylated chrysotile fibers. It has been suggested that in humans, transport of fibers to the pleura is critical to the pathogenesis of mesothelioma. This is supported by the observed recruitment of significant numbers of macrophages and other cells of the immune system to localized lesions of accumulated
humans, transport of fibers to the pleura is critical to the pathogenesis of mesothelioma. This is supported by the observed recruitment of significant numbers of macrophages and other cells of the immune system to localized lesions of accumulated asbestos fibers in the pleural and peritoneal cavities of rats. These lesions
recruitment of significant numbers of macrophages and other cells of the immune system to localized lesions of accumulated asbestos fibers in the pleural and peritoneal cavities of rats. These lesions continued to attract and accumulate macrophages as the disease progressed, and cellular changes within the lesion culminated in a morphologically malignant
and cellular changes within the lesion culminated in a morphologically malignant tumor.Experimental evidence suggests that asbestos acts as a complete carcinogen with the development of mesothelioma occurring in sequential stages of initiation and promotion. The molecular mechanisms underlying the malignant transformation of normal mesothelial cells by asbestos fibers remain unclear
culminated in a morphologically malignant tumor.Experimental evidence suggests that asbestos acts as a complete carcinogen with the development of mesothelioma occurring in sequential stages of initiation and promotion. The molecular mechanisms underlying the malignant transformation of normal mesothelial cells by asbestos fibers remain unclear despite the demonstration of its oncogenic
contact between the asbestos fiber and the chromosomes or structural proteins of the spindle apparatus can induce complex abnormalities. The most common abnormality is monosomy of chromosome 22. Other frequent abnormalities include structural rearrangement of 1p, 3p, 9p and 6q chromosome arms.Common gene abnormalities in mesothelioma cell
proteins of the spindle apparatus can induce complex abnormalities. The most common abnormality is monosomy of chromosome 22. Other frequent abnormalities include structural rearrangement of 1p, 3p, 9p and 6q chromosome arms.Common gene abnormalities in mesothelioma cell lines include deletion of the tumor suppressor genes:Neurofibromatosis
the entry of foreign DNA into target cells. Incorporation of this foreign DNA may lead to mutations and oncogenesis by several possible mechanisms:Inactivation of tumor suppressor genesActivation of oncogenesActivation of proto-oncogenes due to incorporation of foreign DNA containing a promoter regionActivation of DNA repair enzymes, which may
DNA into target cells. Incorporation of this foreign DNA may lead to mutations and oncogenesis by several possible mechanisms:Inactivation of tumor suppressor genesActivation of oncogenesActivation of proto-oncogenes due to incorporation of foreign DNA containing a promoter regionActivation of DNA repair enzymes, which may be prone to errorActivation
target cells. Incorporation of this foreign DNA may lead to mutations and oncogenesis by several possible mechanisms:Inactivation of tumor suppressor genesActivation of oncogenesActivation of proto-oncogenes due to incorporation of foreign DNA containing a promoter regionActivation of DNA repair enzymes, which may be prone to errorActivation of telomerasePrevention
by several possible mechanisms:Inactivation of tumor suppressor genesActivation of oncogenesActivation of proto-oncogenes due to incorporation of foreign DNA containing a promoter regionActivation of DNA repair enzymes, which may be prone to errorActivation of telomerasePrevention of apoptosisSeveral genes are commonly mutated in mesothelioma, and may be prognostic factors
oncogenesActivation of proto-oncogenes due to incorporation of foreign DNA containing a promoter regionActivation of DNA repair enzymes, which may be prone to errorActivation of telomerasePrevention of apoptosisSeveral genes are commonly mutated in mesothelioma, and may be prognostic factors. These include epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
proto-oncogenes due to incorporation of foreign DNA containing a promoter regionActivation of DNA repair enzymes, which may be prone to errorActivation of telomerasePrevention of apoptosisSeveral genes are commonly mutated in mesothelioma, and may be prognostic factors. These include epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and C-
receptor tyrosine kinase is a negative prognostic factor. Expression of PDGFRB is a positive prognostic factor. In general, mesothelioma is characterized by loss of function in tumor suppressor genes, rather than by an overexpression or gain of function in oncogenes.As an environmentally triggered malignancy, mesothelioma tumors
positive prognostic factor. In general, mesothelioma is characterized by loss of function in tumor suppressor genes, rather than by an overexpression or gain of function in oncogenes.As an environmentally triggered malignancy, mesothelioma tumors have been found to be polyclonal in origin, by performing an X-
biphasic tumors obtained from female patients. These results suggest that an environmental factor, most likely asbestos exposure, may damage and transform a group of cells in the tissue, resulting in a population of tumor cells that are, albeit only slightly, genetically different.Asbestos fibers have been
that an environmental factor, most likely asbestos exposure, may damage and transform a group of cells in the tissue, resulting in a population of tumor cells that are, albeit only slightly, genetically different.Asbestos fibers have been shown to alter the function and secretory properties of macrophages
population of tumor cells that are, albeit only slightly, genetically different.Asbestos fibers have been shown to alter the function and secretory properties of macrophages, ultimately creating conditions which favour the development of mesothelioma. Following asbestos phagocytosis, macrophages generate increased amounts of hydroxyl radicals, which are
, genetically different.Asbestos fibers have been shown to alter the function and secretory properties of macrophages, ultimately creating conditions which favour the development of mesothelioma. Following asbestos phagocytosis, macrophages generate increased amounts of hydroxyl radicals, which are normal by-products of cellular anaerobic metabolism. However
the function and secretory properties of macrophages, ultimately creating conditions which favour the development of mesothelioma. Following asbestos phagocytosis, macrophages generate increased amounts of hydroxyl radicals, which are normal by-products of cellular anaerobic metabolism. However, these free radicals are also known clastogenic (chromosome-
of cellular antioxidant defences.Asbestos also may possess immunosuppressive properties. For example, chrysotile fibres have been shown to depress the in vitro proliferation of phytohemagglutinin-stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes, suppress natural killer cell lysis and significantly reduce lymphokine-activated killer cell viability and recovery. Furthermore,
(TGF-β) which in turn, may induce the chronic stimulation and proliferation of mesothelial cells after injury by asbestos fibres.Diagnosis of mesothelioma can be suspected with imaging but is confirmed with biopsy. It must be clinically and histologically differentiated from other pleural and pulmonary malignancies,
symptoms are similar to those of a number of other conditions. Diagnosis begins with a review of the patient's medical history. A history of exposure to asbestos may increase clinical suspicion for mesothelioma. A physical examination is performed, followed by chest X-ray and often lung function
chest X-ray and often lung function tests. The X-ray may reveal pleural thickening commonly seen after asbestos exposure and increases suspicion of mesothelioma. A CT (or CAT) scan or an MRI is usually performed. If a large amount of fluid is present, abnormal
asbestos exposure and increases suspicion of mesothelioma. A CT (or CAT) scan or an MRI is usually performed. If a large amount of fluid is present, abnormal cells may be detected by cytopathology if this fluid is aspirated with a syringe. For pleural fluid, this is
tissue biopsy is more useful in diagnosis. Using conventional cytology  diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma is difficult, but immunohistochemistry has greatly enhanced the accuracy of cytology.Generally, a biopsy is needed to confirm a diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma. A doctor removes a sample of tissue for examination under
greatly enhanced the accuracy of cytology.Generally, a biopsy is needed to confirm a diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma. A doctor removes a sample of tissue for examination under a microscope by a pathologist. A biopsy may be done in different ways, depending on where the abnormal area is
carcinoma or even benign versus malignant. The positive markers indicate that mesothelioma is present; if other markers are positive it may indicate another type of cancer, such as breast or lung adenocarcinoma. Calretinin is a particularly important marker in distinguishing mesothelioma from metastatic breast or lung cancer.There
three main histological subtypes of malignant mesothelioma: epithelioid, sarcomatous, and biphasic. Epithelioid and biphasic mesothelioma make up approximately 75-95% of mesotheliomas and have been well characterized histologically, whereas sarcomatous mesothelioma has not been studied extensively. Most mesotheliomas express high levels of cytokeratin 5 regardless
-95% of mesotheliomas and have been well characterized histologically, whereas sarcomatous mesothelioma has not been studied extensively. Most mesotheliomas express high levels of cytokeratin 5 regardless of subtype.Epithelioid mesothelioma is characterized by high levels of calretinin.Sarcomatous mesothelioma does not express high levels of calretinin.
mesothelioma has not been studied extensively. Most mesotheliomas express high levels of cytokeratin 5 regardless of subtype.Epithelioid mesothelioma is characterized by high levels of calretinin.Sarcomatous mesothelioma does not express high levels of calretinin.Other morphological subtypes have been described:DesmoplasticClear cellDeciduoidAdenomatoidGlandularMucohyalineCartilaginous and osseous metaplasiaLymphohistiocyticMetastatic adenocarcinomaPleural sarcomaSynovial
high levels of cytokeratin 5 regardless of subtype.Epithelioid mesothelioma is characterized by high levels of calretinin.Sarcomatous mesothelioma does not express high levels of calretinin.Other morphological subtypes have been described:DesmoplasticClear cellDeciduoidAdenomatoidGlandularMucohyalineCartilaginous and osseous metaplasiaLymphohistiocyticMetastatic adenocarcinomaPleural sarcomaSynovial sarcomaThymomaMetastatic clear cell renal cell carcinomaMetastatic osteosarcomaStaging of mesothelioma is
high levels of calretinin.Other morphological subtypes have been described:DesmoplasticClear cellDeciduoidAdenomatoidGlandularMucohyalineCartilaginous and osseous metaplasiaLymphohistiocyticMetastatic adenocarcinomaPleural sarcomaSynovial sarcomaThymomaMetastatic clear cell renal cell carcinomaMetastatic osteosarcomaStaging of mesothelioma is based on the recommendation by the International Mesothelioma Interest Group. TNM classification of the primary tumor, lymph node involvement, and distant
in screening asbestos-exposed people for mesothelioma. The level of soluble mesothelin-related protein is elevated in the serum of about 75% of patients at diagnosis and it has been suggested that it may be useful for screening. Doctors have begun testing the Mesomark assay, which measures
organs within the pleural cavity, and the extremely long latency period between asbestos exposure and development of the disease. The histological subtype and the patient's age and health status also help predict prognosis. The epithelioid histology responds better to treatment and has a survival advantage over sarcomatoid histology.The
within the pleural cavity, and the extremely long latency period between asbestos exposure and development of the disease. The histological subtype and the patient's age and health status also help predict prognosis. The epithelioid histology responds better to treatment and has a survival advantage over sarcomatoid histology.The
and health status also help predict prognosis. The epithelioid histology responds better to treatment and has a survival advantage over sarcomatoid histology.The effectiveness of radiotherapy compared to chemotherapy or surgery for malignant pleural mesothelioma is not known.Surgery, by itself, has proved disappointing. In one large
induce severe side-effects, including fatal pneumonitis. As part of a curative approach to mesothelioma, radiotherapy is commonly applied to the sites of chest drain insertion, in order to prevent growth of the tumor along the track in the chest wall.Although mesothelioma is generally resistant to
mesothelioma, showing a statistically significant improvement in median survival from 10 months in the patients treated with cisplatin alone to 13.3 months in the group of patients treated with cisplatin in the combination with pemetrexed and who also received supplementation with folate and vitamin B12. Vitamin supplementation was given to most
Some side effects such as nausea and vomiting, stomatitis, and diarrhoea were more common in the combination pemetrexed group but only affected a minority of patients and overall the combination of pemetrexed and cisplatin was well tolerated when patients received vitamin supplementation; both quality of life and lung function tests
and vomiting, stomatitis, and diarrhoea were more common in the combination pemetrexed group but only affected a minority of patients and overall the combination of pemetrexed and cisplatin was well tolerated when patients received vitamin supplementation; both quality of life and lung function tests improved in the combination pemetrexed group
but only affected a minority of patients and overall the combination of pemetrexed and cisplatin was well tolerated when patients received vitamin supplementation; both quality of life and lung function tests improved in the combination pemetrexed group. In February 2004, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
and Drug Administration (FDA) approved pemetrexed for treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma. However, there are still unanswered questions about the optimal use of chemotherapy, including when to start treatment, and the optimal number of cycles to give. Cisplatin and pemetrexed together give patients a median survival
mesothelioma. However, there are still unanswered questions about the optimal use of chemotherapy, including when to start treatment, and the optimal number of cycles to give. Cisplatin and pemetrexed together give patients a median survival of 12.1 months.Cisplatin in combination with raltitrexed has shown an improvement
.In October 2020, the FDA approved the combination of nivolumab (Opdivo) with ipilimumab (Yervoy) for the first-line treatment of adults with malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) that cannot be removed by surgery. Nivolumab and ipilimumab are both monoclonal antibodies that, when
), but patients undergoing this particular therapy experienced major side effects. Indeed, this trial was suspended in view of the unacceptably high levels of IL-2 toxicity and the severity of side effects such as fever and cachexia. Nonetheless, other trials involving interferon alpha have proved more encouraging with
particular therapy experienced major side effects. Indeed, this trial was suspended in view of the unacceptably high levels of IL-2 toxicity and the severity of side effects such as fever and cachexia. Nonetheless, other trials involving interferon alpha have proved more encouraging with 20% of patients experiencing a
and the severity of side effects such as fever and cachexia. Nonetheless, other trials involving interferon alpha have proved more encouraging with 20% of patients experiencing a greater than 50% reduction in tumor mass combined with minimal side effects.Hyperthermic intrathoracic chemotherapy is used in conjunction with surgery
drugs into tissues. Also, heating itself damages the malignant cells more than the normal cells.Multimodal therapy, which includes a combined approach of surgery, radiation or photodynamic therapy, and chemotherapy, is not suggested for routine practice for treating malignant pleural mesothelioma. The effectiveness and safety
survival. Two surgeries have been developed: extrapleural pneumonectomy and pleurectomy/decortication. The indications for performing these operations are unique. The choice of operation namely depends on the size of the patient's tumor. This is an important consideration because tumor volume has been identified as a prognostic
pneumonectomy and pleurectomy/decortication. The indications for performing these operations are unique. The choice of operation namely depends on the size of the patient's tumor. This is an important consideration because tumor volume has been identified as a prognostic factor in mesothelioma. Pleurectomy/decortication spares the underlying
and pleurectomy/decortication. The indications for performing these operations are unique. The choice of operation namely depends on the size of the patient's tumor. This is an important consideration because tumor volume has been identified as a prognostic factor in mesothelioma. Pleurectomy/decortication spares the underlying
and visceral pleurae, underlying lung, ipsilateral (same side) diaphragm, and ipsilateral pericardium. This operation is  indicated for a subset of patients with more advanced tumors, who can tolerate a pneumonectomy.Mesothelioma often has a poor prognosis. Typical survival despite surgery is between 12
can tolerate a pneumonectomy.Mesothelioma often has a poor prognosis. Typical survival despite surgery is between 12 and 21 months depending on the stage of disease at diagnosis with about 7.5% of people surviving for 5 years.Women, young people, people with low-stage cancers,
a poor prognosis. Typical survival despite surgery is between 12 and 21 months depending on the stage of disease at diagnosis with about 7.5% of people surviving for 5 years.Women, young people, people with low-stage cancers, and people with epithelioid cancers have better prognoses
Morocco, to the highest rate in Britain, Australia and Belgium: 30 per 1,000,000 per year. For comparison, populations with high levels of smoking can have a lung cancer incidence of over 1,000 per 1,000,000. Incidence of malignant mesothelioma currently ranges from about 7 to 40 per 1,000,000
1,000 per 1,000,000. Incidence of malignant mesothelioma currently ranges from about 7 to 40 per 1,000,000 in industrialized Western nations, depending on the amount of asbestos exposure of the populations during the past several decades. Worldwide incidence is estimated at 1-6 per 1,000,000. Incidence of mesothelioma lags
the amount of asbestos exposure of the populations during the past several decades. Worldwide incidence is estimated at 1-6 per 1,000,000. Incidence of mesothelioma lags behind that of asbestosis due to the longer time it takes to develop; due to the cessation of asbestos use in developed countries
6 per 1,000,000. Incidence of mesothelioma lags behind that of asbestosis due to the longer time it takes to develop; due to the cessation of asbestos use in developed countries, mesothelioma incidence is expected to decrease. Incidence is expected to continue increasing in developing countries due to continuing use
asbestos use in developed countries, mesothelioma incidence is expected to decrease. Incidence is expected to continue increasing in developing countries due to continuing use of asbestos. Mesothelioma occurs more often in men than in women and risk increases with age, but this disease can appear in either men or
appear in either men or women at any age. Approximately one fifth to one third of all mesotheliomas are peritoneal. Less than 5% of mesotheliomas are pericardial. The prevalence of pericardial mesothelioma is less than 0.002%; it is more common in men than women. It typically
the USA increased from 2,000 per year to 3,000, with men four times more likely to acquire it than women. More than 80% of mesotheliomas are caused by asbestos exposure.The incidence of peritoneal mesothelioma is 0.5–3.0 per million per year in men, and 0.2–2.0 per million per
diagnosed in the UK, (around 2,600 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and it is the seventeenth most common cause of cancer death (around 2,400 people died in 2012).The connection between asbestos exposure and mesothelioma was discovered in the 1970s. In the United States,
and died roughly a year later. It is believed that this was caused through childhood exposure to asbestos insulation in the attic of his father's shop.David Martin, Australian sailor and politician, died on 10 August 1990 of pleural mesothelioma. It is believed that this was caused
asbestosis, and mesothelioma became known (some reports seem to place this as early as 1898). The liability resulting from the sheer number of lawsuits and people affected has reached billions of dollars.  The amounts and method of allocating compensation have been the source of many court cases
reports seem to place this as early as 1898). The liability resulting from the sheer number of lawsuits and people affected has reached billions of dollars.  The amounts and method of allocating compensation have been the source of many court cases, reaching up to the United States Supreme
Wagner et al. was seminal in establishing mesothelioma as a disease arising from exposure to asbestos. The article referred to over 30 case studies of people who had suffered from mesothelioma in South Africa. Some exposures were transient and some were mine workers. Before the use of advanced microscopy
exposures were transient and some were mine workers. Before the use of advanced microscopy techniques, malignant mesothelioma was often diagnosed as a variant form of lung cancer. In 1962, McNulty reported the first diagnosed case of malignant mesothelioma in an Australian asbestos worker. The worker had worked in
to cover schoolyards and playgrounds. In 1965, an article in the British Journal of Industrial Medicine established that people who lived in the neighbourhoods of asbestos factories and mines, but did not work in them, had contracted mesothelioma.Despite proof that the dust associated with asbestos mining and
the town of Wittenoom, following the publication of a Health Dept. booklet, "The Health Hazard at Wittenoom", containing the results of air sampling and an appraisal of worldwide medical information.By 1979, the first writs for negligence related to Wittenoom were issued against CSR and
Armley asbestos disaster involved several court cases against Turner & Newall where local residents who contracted mesothelioma demanded compensation because of the asbestos pollution from the company's factory. One notable case was that of June Hancock, who contracted the disease in 1993 and died in 1997.The WT-1 protein is overexpressed in
asbestos disaster involved several court cases against Turner & Newall where local residents who contracted mesothelioma demanded compensation because of the asbestos pollution from the company's factory. One notable case was that of June Hancock, who contracted the disease in 1993 and died in 1997.The WT-1 protein is overexpressed in
in mesothelioma and is being researched as a potential target for drugs.There are two high-confidence miRNAs that can potentially serve as biomarkers of asbestos exposure and malignant mesothelioma. Validation studies are needed to assess their relevance.This article includes information from a public domain U.S. National Cancer
may generate their power from fuel (wood, coal, petroleum or natural gas), or they may take power from an outside source of electricity. It is common to classify locomotives by their source of energy. The common ones include:A steam locomotive is a locomotive whose
or natural gas), or they may take power from an outside source of electricity. It is common to classify locomotives by their source of energy. The common ones include:A steam locomotive is a locomotive whose primary power source is a steam engine. The most common form
energy. The common ones include:A steam locomotive is a locomotive whose primary power source is a steam engine. The most common form of steam locomotive also contains a boiler to generate the steam used by the engine. The water in the boiler is heated by burning combustible material
Rocket was entered into, and won, the Rainhill Trials. This success led to the company emerging as the pre-eminent early builder of steam locomotives used on railways in the UK, US and much of Europe. The Liverpool and Manchester Railway, built by Stephenson, opened
the UK, US and much of Europe. The Liverpool and Manchester Railway, built by Stephenson, opened a year later making exclusive use of steam power for passenger and goods trains.The steam locomotive remained by far the most common type of locomotive until after World War II.
opened a year later making exclusive use of steam power for passenger and goods trains.The steam locomotive remained by far the most common type of locomotive until after World War II. Steam locomotives are less efficient than modern diesel and electric locomotives, and a significantly larger workforce is required
cost of supporting an equivalent diesel locomotive, and the daily mileage they could run was lower. Between about 1950 and 1970, the majority of steam locomotives were retired from commercial service and replaced with electric and diesel-electric locomotives. While North America transitioned from steam during the 1950s
80 hp locomotive using a 3-cylinder vertical petrol engine, with a two speed mechanical gearbox. Petrol-mechanical The most common type of petrol locomotive are petrol-mechanical locomotives, which use mechanical transmission in the form of gearboxes (sometimes in conjunction with chain drives) to
mechanical gearbox. Petrol-mechanical The most common type of petrol locomotive are petrol-mechanical locomotives, which use mechanical transmission in the form of gearboxes (sometimes in conjunction with chain drives) to deliver the power output of the engine to the driving wheels, in the same way
Diesel Diesel locomotives are powered by diesel engines. In the early days of Diesel propulsion development, various transmission systems were employed with varying degrees of success, with electric transmission proving to be the most popular. Diesel-mechanical A diesel–mechanical locomotive uses mechanical transmission to transfer power
to be the most popular. Diesel-mechanical A diesel–mechanical locomotive uses mechanical transmission to transfer power to the wheels. This type of transmission is generally limited to low-powered, low speed shunting (switching) locomotives, lightweight multiple units and self-propelled railcars.
) was operated in the summer of 1912 on the Winterthur–Romanshorn railway in Switzerland, but was not a commercial success. Small numbers of prototype diesel locomotives were produced in a number of countries through the mid-1920s. Diesel-electric Diesel–electric locomotives are diesel locomotives using electric
the Winterthur–Romanshorn railway in Switzerland, but was not a commercial success. Small numbers of prototype diesel locomotives were produced in a number of countries through the mid-1920s. Diesel-electric Diesel–electric locomotives are diesel locomotives using electric transmission. The diesel engine drives either an electrical
power to the traction motors that drive the locomotive. There is no mechanical connection between the diesel engine and the wheels. The vast majority of diesel locomotives today are diesel-electric.In 1914, Hermann Lemp, a General Electric electrical engineer, developed and patented a reliable direct
, with designs including the 1950s DB Class V 200, and the 1960 and 1970s DB V 160 family. British Rail introduced a number of diesel hydraulic designs during it 1955 Modernisation Plan, initially license built versions of German designs. In Spain Renfe Operadora used high power to weight
be allowed to continue to run when the locomotive is stopped.Gas turbine-mechanical locomotives use a mechanical transmission to deliver the power output of gas turbines to the wheels. A gas turbine locomotive was patented in 1861 by Marc Antoine Francois Mennons (British patent no. 1633)
Mennons (British patent no. 1633). There is no evidence that the locomotive was actually built but the design includes the essential features of gas turbine locomotives, including compressor, combustion chamber, turbine and air pre-heater. In 1952, Renault delivered a prototype four-
and delivered in 1951. A third locomotive, the British Rail GT3, was constructed in 1961. Union Pacific Railroad ran a large fleet of turbine-powered freight locomotives starting in the 1950s. These were widely used on long-haul routes, and were cost-effective despite
also physically smaller than an equally powerful piston engine, allowing a locomotive to be very powerful without being inordinately large. However, a turbine's power output and efficiency both drop dramatically with rotational speed, unlike a piston engine, which has a comparatively flat power curve. This makes
motor shaft engages a bull gear on the axle. Both gears are enclosed in a liquid-tight housing containing lubricating oil. The type of service in which the locomotive is used dictates the gear ratio employed. Numerically high ratios are commonly found on freight units, whereas numerically low
.The first electrically-worked underground line was the City and South London Railway, prompted by a clause in its enabling act prohibiting use of steam power. It opened in 1890, using electric locomotives built by Mather & Platt. Electricity quickly became the power supply of choice for
prohibiting use of steam power. It opened in 1890, using electric locomotives built by Mather & Platt. Electricity quickly became the power supply of choice for subways, abetted by the Sprague's invention of multiple-unit train control in 1897.The first use of electrification on a main line
quickly became the power supply of choice for subways, abetted by the Sprague's invention of multiple-unit train control in 1897.The first use of electrification on a main line was on a four-mile stretch of the Baltimore Belt Line of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&O)
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&O) in 1895 connecting the main portion of the B&O to the new line to New York through a series of tunnels around the edges of Baltimore's downtown. Three Bo+Bo units were initially used, at the south end of the electrified section; they
Battery-electric A battery-electric locomotive (or battery locomotive) is an electric locomotive powered by on-board batteries; a kind of battery electric vehicle.Such locomotives are used where a conventional diesel or electric locomotive would be unsuitable. An example is maintenance trains on electrified
industrial facilities where a combustion-powered locomotive (i.e., steam- or diesel-powered) could cause a safety issue due to the risks of fire, explosion or fumes in a confined space. Battery locomotives are preferred for mines where gas could be ignited by trolley-powered units
85 tons and operated on 750-volt overhead trolley wire with considerable further range whilst running on batteries.  The locomotives provided several decades of service using Nickel–iron battery (Edison) technology. The batteries were replaced with lead-acid batteries, and the locomotives were retired
American railroads. Following the end of World War II, diesel power began to appear on railroads in many countries. The significantly better economics of diesel operation triggered a dash to diesel power, a process known as Dieselisation. By the late 1990s, only heritage railways continued to operate
railways continued to operate steam locomotives in most countries.Diesel locomotives require considerably less maintenance than steam, with a corresponding reduction in the number of personnel needed to keep the fleet in service. The best steam locomotives spent an average of three to five days per month in the shop
removal of the boiler from the frame for major repairs. In contrast, a typical diesel locomotive requires no more than eight to ten hours of maintenance per month (maintenance intervals are 92 days or 184 days, depending upon a locomotive's age), and may run for decades
requires no more than eight to ten hours of maintenance per month (maintenance intervals are 92 days or 184 days, depending upon a locomotive's age), and may run for decades between major overhauls. Diesel units do not pollute as much as steam trains; modern units produce
, and may run for decades between major overhauls. Diesel units do not pollute as much as steam trains; modern units produce low levels of exhaust emissions. Atomic-electric In the early 1950s, Dr. Lyle Borst of the University of Utah was given funding by various US railroad
steam to generate the electricity. At that time, atomic power was not fully understood; Borst believed the major stumbling block was the price of uranium. With the Borst atomic locomotive, the center section would have a 200-ton reactor chamber and steel walls 5 feet thick to
With the Borst atomic locomotive, the center section would have a 200-ton reactor chamber and steel walls 5 feet thick to prevent releases of radioactivity in case of accidents. He estimated a cost to manufacture atomic locomotives with 7000 h.p. engines at approximately $1,200,000 each. Consequently
locomotive, the center section would have a 200-ton reactor chamber and steel walls 5 feet thick to prevent releases of radioactivity in case of accidents. He estimated a cost to manufacture atomic locomotives with 7000 h.p. engines at approximately $1,200,000 each. Consequently, trains with onboard
a fuel cell-electric locomotive. Hybrid locomotives There are many different types of hybrid or dual-mode locomotives using two or more types of motive power. The most common hybrids are electro-diesel locomotives powered either from an electricity supply or else by an onboard diesel engine.
are used to provide continuous journeys along routes that are only partly electrified. Examples include the EMD FL9 and Bombardier ALP-45DPThere are three main uses of locomotives in rail transport operations: for hauling passenger trains, freight trains, and for switching (UK English: shunting).Freight locomotives are normally designed
in switching operations, being remotely controlled by an operator outside of the locomotive cab.The main benefit is one operator can control the loading of grain, coal, gravel, etc. into the cars. In addition, the same operator can move the train as needed. Thus
the power unit, it is relatively easy to replace the locomotive with another, while not removing the entire train from service.Maximum utilization of power carsSeparate locomotives facilitate movement of costly motive power assets as needed; thereby avoiding the expense associated with tied up or idle power resources.
obstacle encountered on the rail line, the heavier mass of a locomotive is less likely to deviate from its normal course. In the event of fire, it might be safer, for example, with diesel locomotives.NoiseA single source of tractive power (i.e., motors in one
Energy efficiencyMultiple units are more energy efficient than locomotive-hauled trains and more nimble, especially on down grades, as much more of the train's weight (sometimes all of it) is placed on driven wheels, rather than suffering the dead weight of unpowered coaches.No need to
efficiencyMultiple units are more energy efficient than locomotive-hauled trains and more nimble, especially on down grades, as much more of the train's weight (sometimes all of it) is placed on driven wheels, rather than suffering the dead weight of unpowered coaches.No need to
. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-02776-0. Media related to Locomotives at Wikimedia CommonsAn engineer's guide from 1891Locomotive cutaways and historical locomotives of several countries ordered by datesPickzone Locomotive ModelInternational Steam LocomotivesTurning a Locomotive into a Stationary Engine, Popular Science
first described by Albert Sézary. The affected T-cells known as Sézary's cells, and also as Lutzner cells, have pathological quantities of mucopolysaccharides. Sézary disease is sometimes considered a late stage of mycosis fungoides with lymphadenopathy.Sézary disease and mycosis fungoides are cutaneous T-cell
known as Sézary's cells, and also as Lutzner cells, have pathological quantities of mucopolysaccharides. Sézary disease is sometimes considered a late stage of mycosis fungoides with lymphadenopathy.Sézary disease and mycosis fungoides are cutaneous T-cell lymphomas having a primary manifestation in the skin. The disease
mycosis fungoides with lymphadenopathy.Sézary disease and mycosis fungoides are cutaneous T-cell lymphomas having a primary manifestation in the skin. The disease's origin is a peripheral CD4+ T-lymphocyte, although rarer CD8+/CD4- cases have been observed. Epidermotropism (lymphocytes residing in the epidermis)
have Sézary disease often present with skin lesions that do not heal with normal medication. A blood test generally reveals any change in the levels of lymphocytes in the blood, which is often associated with a cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Finally, a biopsy of a skin lesion can
today. No single treatment type has revealed clear-cut benefits in comparison to others, treatment for all cases remains problematic.A number of types of radiation therapy may be used including total skin electron therapy. While this therapy does not generally result in systemic toxic effects it can
No single treatment type has revealed clear-cut benefits in comparison to others, treatment for all cases remains problematic.A number of types of radiation therapy may be used including total skin electron therapy. While this therapy does not generally result in systemic toxic effects it can produce side
3 cases of Sézary syndrome per 1,000,000 people. Sézary disease is more common in males with a ratio of 2:1, and the mean age of diagnosis is between 55 and 60 years of age.List of cutaneous conditionsIllustration of Sezary cellsSezary Syndrome lymphoma information
. Sézary disease is more common in males with a ratio of 2:1, and the mean age of diagnosis is between 55 and 60 years of age.List of cutaneous conditionsIllustration of Sezary cellsSezary Syndrome lymphoma information
is considered a rare malignancy. Thymomas are frequently associated with the neuromuscular disorder such as  myasthenia gravis; thymoma is found in 20% of patients with myasthenia gravis. Once diagnosed, thymomas may be removed surgically. In the rare case of a malignant tumor, chemotherapy may be
problems may take the form of superior vena cava syndrome, dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), cough, or chest pain.One-third of patients have their tumors discovered because they have an associated autoimmune disorder. As mentioned earlier, the most common of those conditions is myasthenia gravis
they have an associated autoimmune disorder. As mentioned earlier, the most common of those conditions is myasthenia gravis (MG); 10–15% of patients with MG have a thymoma and, conversely, 30–45% of patients with thymomas have MG. Additional associated autoimmune conditions include thymoma-
common of those conditions is myasthenia gravis (MG); 10–15% of patients with MG have a thymoma and, conversely, 30–45% of patients with thymomas have MG. Additional associated autoimmune conditions include thymoma-associated multiorgan autoimmunity, pure red cell aplasia and Good syndrome (thymoma
.Thymoma originates from the epithelial cell population in the thymus, and several microscopic subtypes are now recognized. There are three principal histological types of thymoma, depending on the appearance of the cells by microscopy:Type A if the epithelial cells have an oval or fusiform shape (less
enhancement on CT scans can be indicative of malignancy, as can be pleural deposits.  Limited biopsies are associated with a very small risk of pneumomediastinum or mediastinitis and an even-lower risk of damaging the heart or large blood vessels. Sometimes thymoma metastasize for instance to the abdomen
of myasthenia), electrolytes, liver enzymes and renal function.The Masaoka Staging System is used widely and is based on the anatomic extent of disease at the time of surgery:I:   Completely encapsulatedIIA: Microscopic invasion through the capsule into surrounding fatty tissueIIB: Macroscopic invasion into
, liver enzymes and renal function.The Masaoka Staging System is used widely and is based on the anatomic extent of disease at the time of surgery:I:   Completely encapsulatedIIA: Microscopic invasion through the capsule into surrounding fatty tissueIIB: Macroscopic invasion into capsuleIII: Macroscopic invasion into
capsuleIII: Macroscopic invasion into adjacent organsIVA: Pleural or pericardial implantsIVB: Lymphogenous or hematogenous metastasis to distant (extrathoracic) sitesSurgery is the mainstay of treatment for thymoma. If the tumor is apparently invasive and large, preoperative (neoadjuvant) chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy may be used to decrease the
for several infectious agents are recommended. Invasive thymomas may require additional treatment with radiotherapy and chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and cisplatin).. Recurrences of thymoma are described in 10-30% of cases up to 10 years after surgical resection, and in the majority of cases also pleural
may require additional treatment with radiotherapy and chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and cisplatin).. Recurrences of thymoma are described in 10-30% of cases up to 10 years after surgical resection, and in the majority of cases also pleural recurrences can be removed. Recently, surgical removal
).. Recurrences of thymoma are described in 10-30% of cases up to 10 years after surgical resection, and in the majority of cases also pleural recurrences can be removed. Recently, surgical removal of pleural recurrences can be followed by hyperthermic intrathoracic perfusion chemotherapy or intrathoracic hyperthermic
I and II tumors.  Invasive thymomas uncommonly can also metastasize, generally to pleura, bones, liver or brain in approximately 7% of cases.  A study found that slightly over 40% of observed patients with stage III and IV tumors survived for at least 10 years
observed patients with stage III and IV tumors survived for at least 10 years after diagnosis. The median age of these patients at the time of thymoma diagnosis was 57 years. Patients who have undergone thymectomy for thymoma should be warned of possible severe side effects after yellow fever vaccination.
It often begins as short periods of abnormal beating, which become longer or continuous over time.  It may also start as other forms of arrhythmia such as atrial flutter that then transform into AF. Often episodes have no symptoms. Occasionally there may be heart palpitations, fainting,
atrial flutter that then transform into AF. Often episodes have no symptoms. Occasionally there may be heart palpitations, fainting, lightheadedness, shortness of breath, or chest pain. The disease is associated with an increased risk of heart failure, dementia, and stroke. It is a
there may be heart palpitations, fainting, lightheadedness, shortness of breath, or chest pain. The disease is associated with an increased risk of heart failure, dementia, and stroke. It is a type of supraventricular tachycardia.High blood pressure and valvular heart disease are the most
and is often necessary for emergent use if the person is unstable. Ablation may prevent recurrence in some people. For those at low risk of stroke, AF does not necessarily require blood-thinning though some healthcare providers may prescribe aspirin or an anti-clotting medication. For those
experts generally recommend an anti-clotting medication. Anti-clotting medications include warfarin and direct oral anticoagulants. Most people are at higher risk of stroke. While these medications reduce stroke risk, they increase rates of major bleeding.Atrial fibrillation is the most common serious abnormal heart rhythm
North America. This was an increase from 0.4 to 1% of the population around 2005. In the developing world, about 0.6% of males and 0.4% of females are affected. The percentage of people with AF increases with age with 0.1% under 50 years old,
an increase from 0.4 to 1% of the population around 2005. In the developing world, about 0.6% of males and 0.4% of females are affected. The percentage of people with AF increases with age with 0.1% under 50 years old, 4% between 60 and
of the population around 2005. In the developing world, about 0.6% of males and 0.4% of females are affected. The percentage of people with AF increases with age with 0.1% under 50 years old, 4% between 60 and 70 years old, and 14%
irregularly, or skipping beats (palpitations) or exercise intolerance and occasionally may produce anginal chest pain (if the high heart rate causes the heart's demand for oxygen to increase beyond the supply of available oxygen (ischemia)). Other possible symptoms include congestive heart failure symptoms such as
, or skipping beats (palpitations) or exercise intolerance and occasionally may produce anginal chest pain (if the high heart rate causes the heart's demand for oxygen to increase beyond the supply of available oxygen (ischemia)). Other possible symptoms include congestive heart failure symptoms such as
to increase beyond the supply of available oxygen (ischemia)). Other possible symptoms include congestive heart failure symptoms such as fatigue, shortness of breath, or swelling. The abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia) is sometimes only identified with the onset of a stroke or a transient ischemic
examination or ECG, as it often does not cause symptoms.Since most cases of AF are secondary to other medical problems, the presence of chest pain or angina, signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid gland) such as weight loss and diarrhea, and symptoms suggestive
cause symptoms.Since most cases of AF are secondary to other medical problems, the presence of chest pain or angina, signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid gland) such as weight loss and diarrhea, and symptoms suggestive of lung disease can indicate an underlying cause.
an overactive thyroid gland) such as weight loss and diarrhea, and symptoms suggestive of lung disease can indicate an underlying cause. A history of stroke or TIA, as well as high blood pressure, diabetes, heart failure, or rheumatic fever, may indicate whether someone with AF
well as high blood pressure, diabetes, heart failure, or rheumatic fever, may indicate whether someone with AF is at a higher risk of complications. The risk of a blood clot forming in the left atrial chamber of the heart, breaking off, and then traveling in the
rapid heart rate and may be asymptomatic. Palpitations and chest discomfort are common complaints. The rapid uncoordinated heart rate may result in reduced output of blood pumped by the heart (cardiac output), resulting in inadequate blood flow, and therefore oxygen delivery to the rest of the body
resulting in inadequate blood flow, and therefore oxygen delivery to the rest of the body. Common symptoms of uncontrolled atrial fibrillation may include shortness of breath, shortness of breath when lying flat, dizziness, and sudden onset of shortness of breath during the night. This may progress to
flow, and therefore oxygen delivery to the rest of the body. Common symptoms of uncontrolled atrial fibrillation may include shortness of breath, shortness of breath when lying flat, dizziness, and sudden onset of shortness of breath during the night. This may progress to swelling of the lower
body. Common symptoms of uncontrolled atrial fibrillation may include shortness of breath, shortness of breath when lying flat, dizziness, and sudden onset of shortness of breath during the night. This may progress to swelling of the lower extremities, a manifestation of congestive heart failure. Due to
Common symptoms of uncontrolled atrial fibrillation may include shortness of breath, shortness of breath when lying flat, dizziness, and sudden onset of shortness of breath during the night. This may progress to swelling of the lower extremities, a manifestation of congestive heart failure. Due to inadequate cardiac
affected person's respiratory rate often increases in the presence of respiratory distress. Pulse oximetry may confirm the presence of too little oxygen reaching the body's tissues, related to any precipitating factors such as pneumonia. Examination of the jugular veins may reveal elevated pressure (jugular venous distention).
person's respiratory rate often increases in the presence of respiratory distress. Pulse oximetry may confirm the presence of too little oxygen reaching the body's tissues, related to any precipitating factors such as pneumonia. Examination of the jugular veins may reveal elevated pressure (jugular venous distention).
and sarcoidosis) may play a role in certain people. Sepsis also increases the risk of developing new-onset atrial fibrillation.  Disorders of breathing during sleep, such as obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), are also associated with AF. Obesity is a risk factor for AF
secondhand tobacco smoke exposure are associated with an increased risk of developing atrial fibrillation. Long-term endurance exercise that far exceeds the recommended amount of exercise (e.g., long-distance cycling or marathon running) appears to be associated with a modest increase in the risk of atrial fibrillation
of different loci such as 10q22-24, 6q14-16 and 11p15-5.3 and discover mutations associated with the loci. Fifteen mutations of gain and loss of function have been found in the genes of K+ channels, including mutations in KCNE1-5, KCNH2, KCNJ5 or
as 10q22-24, 6q14-16 and 11p15-5.3 and discover mutations associated with the loci. Fifteen mutations of gain and loss of function have been found in the genes of K+ channels, including mutations in KCNE1-5, KCNH2, KCNJ5 or ABCC9 among others.
and 11p15-5.3 and discover mutations associated with the loci. Fifteen mutations of gain and loss of function have been found in the genes of K+ channels, including mutations in KCNE1-5, KCNH2, KCNJ5 or ABCC9 among others. Six variations in genes of Na+ channels that
in genes of Na+ channels that include SCN1-4B, SCN5A and SCN10A have also been found. All of these mutations affect the processes of polarization-depolarization of the myocardium, cellular hyper-excitability, shortening of effective refractory period favoring re-entries.Other mutations in genes
loci there are SNPs associated with a 30% increase in risk of recurrent atrial tachycardia after ablation. There are also SNPs associated with loss of function of the Pitx2c gene (involved in cellular development of pulmonary valves), responsible for re-entries. There are also SNPs close
in cellular development of pulmonary valves), responsible for re-entries. There are also SNPs close to ZFHX3 genes involved in the regulation of Ca2+.A GWAS meta-analysis study conducted in 2018 revealed the discovery of 70 new loci associated with AF. Different variants have been identified.
that encode transcription factors, such as TBX3 and TBX5, NKX2-5 or PITX2, involved in the regulation of cardiac conduction, modulation of ion channels and in cardiac development. Have been also identified new genes involved in tachycardia (CASQ2) or associated with an alteration in cardiomyocyte
an alteration in cardiomyocyte communication (PKP2).Rare mutations in the cardiomyopathy gene TTN may also increase the risk of AF, even in individuals without signs of heart failure. Small genetic deletions on the X chromosome around the STS (steroid sulfatase) gene are associated with increased rates of AF in
, such as obesity, hypertension, or diabetes mellitus. This favors remodeling processes of the atrium due to inflammation or alterations in the depolarization of cardiomyocytes by elevation of sympathetic nervous system activity. A sedentary lifestyle is associated with an increased risk of AF compared to physical activity. In
an episode of atrial fibrillation. Regular alcohol consumption also increases the risk of atrial fibrillation in several ways.  The long-term use of alcohol alters the physical structure and electrical properties of the atria.  Alcohol consumption does this by repeatedly stimulating the sympathetic nervous system, increasing
 Alcohol consumption does this by repeatedly stimulating the sympathetic nervous system, increasing inflammation in the atria, raising blood pressure, lowering the levels of potassium and magnesium in the blood, worsening obstructive sleep apnea, and by promoting harmful structural changes (remodeling) in the atria and ventricles
re-entrant electric conduction from the pulmonary veins.There is a relationship between risk factors such as obesity and hypertension, with the appearance of diseases such as diabetes mellitus and sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome, specifically, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). These diseases are associated with
atrium.Several medications are associated with an increased risk of developing atrial fibrillation. Few studies have examined this phenomenon, and the exact incidence of medication-induced atrial fibrillation is unknown. Medications that are commonly associated with an increased risk of developing atrial fibrillation include dobutamine and the chemotherapy
also associated with fibrosis of the atria that can lead to atrial fibrillation.Once dilation of the atria has occurred, this begins a chain of events that leads to the activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS) and subsequent increase in matrix metalloproteinases and disintegrin,
slow conduction velocity of the cardiac action potential, a short refractory period, and a small wavelength. Meanwhile, the wavelength is the product of velocity and refractory period. If the action potential has fast conduction, with a long refractory period and/or conduction pathway shorter than the wavelength,
with AF, the increased calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum and increased calcium sensitivity can lead to an accumulation of intracellular calcium and causes downregulation of L-type calcium channels. This reduces the duration of action potential and refractory period, thus favorable for the conduction of re-entrant
and increased calcium sensitivity can lead to an accumulation of intracellular calcium and causes downregulation of L-type calcium channels. This reduces the duration of action potential and refractory period, thus favorable for the conduction of re-entrant waves. Increased expression of inward-rectifier potassium ion channels
-entrant waves. Increased expression of inward-rectifier potassium ion channels can cause a reduced atrial refractory period and wavelength. The abnormal distribution of gap junction proteins such as GJA1 (also known as Connexin 43), and GJA5 (Connexin 40) causes non-uniformity of electrical
count, and serum thyroid stimulating hormone level.Limited evidence suggests that screening for atrial fibrillation in those 65 years and older increases the number of cases of atrial fibrillation detected. A Scottish inquiry into atrial fibrillation estimated that as many as one-third of people with AF are undiagnosed
and older increases the number of cases of atrial fibrillation detected. A Scottish inquiry into atrial fibrillation estimated that as many as one-third of people with AF are undiagnosed. Despite this, in 2018, the United States Preventive Services Task Force found insufficient evidence to determine the usefulness
is administered for treatment) and a blood count.In acute-onset AF associated with chest pain, cardiac troponins, or other markers of damage to the heart muscle may be ordered. Coagulation studies (INR/aPTT) are usually performed, as anticoagulant medication may be commenced
fibrillation is diagnosed on an electrocardiogram (ECG), an investigation performed routinely whenever an irregular heartbeat is suspected. Characteristic findings are the absence of P waves, with disorganized electrical activity in their place, and irregular R–R intervals due to irregular conduction of impulses to the ventricles
findings are the absence of P waves, with disorganized electrical activity in their place, and irregular R–R intervals due to irregular conduction of impulses to the ventricles. At very fast heart rates, atrial fibrillation may look more regular, which may make it more difficult to separate
person's clinical state. This ultrasound-based scan of the heart may help identify valvular heart disease (which may greatly increase the risk of stroke and alter recommendations for the appropriate type of anticoagulation), left and right atrial size (which predicts the likelihood that AF may become
scan of the heart may help identify valvular heart disease (which may greatly increase the risk of stroke and alter recommendations for the appropriate type of anticoagulation), left and right atrial size (which predicts the likelihood that AF may become permanent), left ventricular size and function,
, if noted at the initial presentation of atrial fibrillation, suggests that the atrial fibrillation is likely to be of a longer duration than the individual's symptoms.In general, an extended evaluation is not necessary for most individuals with atrial fibrillation and is performed only if abnormalities are noted in
if noted at the initial presentation of atrial fibrillation, suggests that the atrial fibrillation is likely to be of a longer duration than the individual's symptoms.In general, an extended evaluation is not necessary for most individuals with atrial fibrillation and is performed only if abnormalities are noted in
than transthoracic echocardiography. This structure, located in the left atrium, is the place where a blood clot forms in more than 90% of cases in non-valvular (or non-rheumatic) atrial fibrillation. TEE has a high sensitivity for locating thrombi in this area and
area that is suggestive of blood clot formation.If a blood clot is seen on TEE, then cardioversion is contraindicated due to the risk of stroke, and anticoagulation is recommended. Ambulatory Holter monitoring A Holter monitor is a wearable ambulatory heart monitor that continuously monitors the heart rate and
monitor that continuously monitors the heart rate and heart rhythm for a short duration, typically 24 hours. In individuals with symptoms of significant shortness of breath with exertion or palpitations regularly, a Holter monitor may be of benefit to determine whether rapid heart rates (or unusually slow heart rates
during atrial fibrillation are the cause of the symptoms. Exercise stress testing Some individuals with atrial fibrillation do well with normal activity but develop shortness of breath with exertion. It may be unclear whether the shortness of breath is due to a blunted heart rate response to exertion caused by excessive
testing Some individuals with atrial fibrillation do well with normal activity but develop shortness of breath with exertion. It may be unclear whether the shortness of breath is due to a blunted heart rate response to exertion caused by excessive atrioventricular node-blocking agents, a very rapid heart rate during
rapid heart rate during exertion, or other underlying conditions such as chronic lung disease or coronary ischemia. An exercise stress test will evaluate the individual's heart rate response to exertion and determine whether the AV node blocking agents are contributing to the symptoms.The American College of Cardiology (ACC
heart rate during exertion, or other underlying conditions such as chronic lung disease or coronary ischemia. An exercise stress test will evaluate the individual's heart rate response to exertion and determine whether the AV node blocking agents are contributing to the symptoms.The American College of Cardiology (ACC
If cardioversion is unsuccessful, or not attempted and the episode continues for a long time (e.g., a year or more), the person's AF is then known as permanent.Episodes that last less than 30 seconds are not considered in this classification system. Also, this system
cardioversion is unsuccessful, or not attempted and the episode continues for a long time (e.g., a year or more), the person's AF is then known as permanent.Episodes that last less than 30 seconds are not considered in this classification system. Also, this system
cases where the AF is a secondary condition that occurs in the setting of a primary condition that may be the cause of the AF.About half of people with AF have permanent AF, while a quarter has paroxysmal AF, and a quarter has persistent AF.In addition to the above four AF
weight, and regularly participating in moderate-intensity physical activities. Consistent moderate-intensity aerobic exercise, defined as achieving 3.0-5.9 METs of intensity, for at least 150 minutes per week may reduce the risk of developing new-onset atrial fibrillation. Few studies have examined the
fibrillation. Few studies have examined the role of specific dietary changes and how it relates to the prevention of atrial fibrillation.The main goals of treatment are to prevent circulatory instability and stroke. Rate or rhythm control is used to achieve the former, whereas anticoagulation is used to decrease
latter. If cardiovascularly unstable due to uncontrolled tachycardia, immediate cardioversion is indicated. Many antiarrhythmics, when used long term, increase the risk of death without any meaningful benefit. An integrated management approach, which includes stroke prevention, symptoms control and management of associated comorbdities  was associated
associated comorbdities  was associated with better outcomes in patients with atrial fibrillation.Regular aerobic exercise improves atrial fibrillation symptoms and AF-related quality of life. The effect of high-intensity interval training on reducing atrial fibrillation burden is unclear. Weight loss of at least 10% is
Bariatric surgery may reduce the risk of new-onset atrial fibrillation in people with obesity without AF and may reduce the risk of a recurrence of AF after an ablation procedure in people with coexisting obesity and atrial fibrillation. It is important for all people with atrial fibrillation to optimize the
high blood pressure, stimulant use (e.g., methamphetamine dependence), and excessive alcohol consumption.Anticoagulation can be used to reduce the risk of stroke from AF. Anticoagulation is recommended in most people other than those at low risk of stroke or those at high risk of bleeding.
.Anticoagulation can be used to reduce the risk of stroke from AF. Anticoagulation is recommended in most people other than those at low risk of stroke or those at high risk of bleeding. The risk of falls and consequent bleeding in frail elderly people should not be considered a barrier
the risk of stroke from AF. Anticoagulation is recommended in most people other than those at low risk of stroke or those at high risk of bleeding. The risk of falls and consequent bleeding in frail elderly people should not be considered a barrier to initiating or continuing anticoagulation since the
AF. Anticoagulation is recommended in most people other than those at low risk of stroke or those at high risk of bleeding. The risk of falls and consequent bleeding in frail elderly people should not be considered a barrier to initiating or continuing anticoagulation since the risk of fall-related
. The risk of falls and consequent bleeding in frail elderly people should not be considered a barrier to initiating or continuing anticoagulation since the risk of fall-related brain bleeding is low and the benefit of stroke prevention often outweighs the risk of bleeding. Similarly, the presence or absence
people should not be considered a barrier to initiating or continuing anticoagulation since the risk of fall-related brain bleeding is low and the benefit of stroke prevention often outweighs the risk of bleeding. Similarly, the presence or absence of AF symptoms does not determine whether a person warrants anticoagulation
to initiating or continuing anticoagulation since the risk of fall-related brain bleeding is low and the benefit of stroke prevention often outweighs the risk of bleeding. Similarly, the presence or absence of AF symptoms does not determine whether a person warrants anticoagulation and is not an indicator of stroke
risk of bleeding. Similarly, the presence or absence of AF symptoms does not determine whether a person warrants anticoagulation and is not an indicator of stroke risk. Oral anticoagulation is underused in atrial fibrillation, while aspirin is overused in many who should be treated with a direct oral anticoagulant
oral anticoagulant (DOAC)  or warfarin. In 2019, DOACs were often recommended over warfarin by the American Heart Association.The risk of stroke from non-valvular AF can be estimated using the CHA2DS2-VASc score. In the 2019 AHA/ACC/HRS guidelines anticoagulation
used for people with a score of one (moderate risk for stroke). There is little evidence to support the idea that the use of aspirin significantly reduces the risk of stroke in people with atrial fibrillation. Furthermore, aspirin's major bleeding risk (including bleeding in the brain
of one (moderate risk for stroke). There is little evidence to support the idea that the use of aspirin significantly reduces the risk of stroke in people with atrial fibrillation. Furthermore, aspirin's major bleeding risk (including bleeding in the brain) is similar to that of
, heparin, dabigatran, rivaroxaban, edoxaban, and apixaban. Many issues should be considered related to their comparative effectiveness, including the cost of DOACs, risk of stroke, risk of falls, comorbidities (such as chronic liver or kidney disease), the presence of significant mitral
, rivaroxaban, edoxaban, and apixaban. Many issues should be considered related to their comparative effectiveness, including the cost of DOACs, risk of stroke, risk of falls, comorbidities (such as chronic liver or kidney disease), the presence of significant mitral stenosis or mechanical heart
, and apixaban. Many issues should be considered related to their comparative effectiveness, including the cost of DOACs, risk of stroke, risk of falls, comorbidities (such as chronic liver or kidney disease), the presence of significant mitral stenosis or mechanical heart valves, compliance,
chronic liver or kidney disease), the presence of significant mitral stenosis or mechanical heart valves, compliance, and speed of the desired onset of anticoagulation. The optimal approach to anticoagulation in people with AF and who simultaneously have other diseases (e.g., cirrhosis and end-stage kidney
blood clots embolizing to the systemic circulation (if not more so) and are generally preferred over warfarin.  DOACs carry a lower risk of bleeding in the brain compared to warfarin, although dabigatran is associated with a higher risk of intestinal bleeding. Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and
suggest that rhythm control is more important in the acute setting AF, whereas rate control is more important in the chronic phase.The risk of stroke appears to be lower with rate control versus attempted rhythm control, at least in those with heart failure. AF is associated with a
to be lower with rate control versus attempted rhythm control, at least in those with heart failure. AF is associated with a reduced quality of life, and, while some studies indicate that rhythm control leads to a higher quality of life, some did not find a difference.
failure. AF is associated with a reduced quality of life, and, while some studies indicate that rhythm control leads to a higher quality of life, some did not find a difference.Neither rate nor rhythm control is superior in people with heart failure when they are compared in
signs, mental status changes, preexcitation, or chest pain often will go to immediate treatment with synchronized DC cardioversion. Otherwise, the decision of rate control versus rhythm control using medications is made. This is based several criteria that include whether or not symptoms persist with rate control.
Rate control is achieved with medications that work by increasing the degree of the block at the level of the AV node, decreasing the number of impulses that conduct into the ventricles. This can be done with:Beta blockers (preferably the "cardioselective" beta blockers such as metoprolol
electrically isolates the left atrium from the pulmonary veins, where most of the abnormal electrical activity promoting atrial fibrillation originates. CA is a form of rhythm control that restores normal sinus rhythm and reduces AF-associated symptoms more reliably than antiarrhythmic medications. Electrophysiologists generally use two forms of catheter
form of rhythm control that restores normal sinus rhythm and reduces AF-associated symptoms more reliably than antiarrhythmic medications. Electrophysiologists generally use two forms of catheter ablation—radiofrequency ablation and cryoablation. In young people with little-to-no structural heart disease where rhythm control is desired and
be particularly helpful for people with AF who also have heart failure.  AF may recur in people who have undergone CA and nearly half of people who undergo it will require a repeat procedure to achieve long-term control of their AF. In general, CA is more successful
paroxysmal as opposed to persistent or permanent. CA is useful to reduce AF symptoms and reduce AF burden, but does not reduce the risk of stroke, therefore many are advised to continue their anticoagulation. Possible complications include common, minor complications such as the formation of a collection of
of stroke, therefore many are advised to continue their anticoagulation. Possible complications include common, minor complications such as the formation of a collection of blood at the site where the catheter goes into the vein (access site hematoma), but also more dangerous complications including bleeding around the
AF often occurs after cardiac surgery and is usually self-limiting. It is strongly associated with age, preoperative hypertension, and the number of vessels grafted. Measures should be taken to control hypertension preoperatively to reduce the risk of AF. Also, people with a higher risk of
a higher risk of AF, e.g., people with pre-operative hypertension, more than three vessels grafted, or greater than 70 years of age, should be considered for prophylactic treatment. Postoperative pericardial effusion is also suspected to be the cause of atrial fibrillation. Prophylaxis may include
persistent cases, anticoagulation should be used. Left atrial appendage occlusion There is tentative evidence that left atrial appendage occlusion therapy may reduce the risk of stroke in people with non-valvular AF as much as warfarin. After surgery After catheter ablation, people are moved to a cardiac recovery
where they are not allowed to move for 4–6 hours. Minimizing movement helps prevent bleeding from the site of the catheter insertion. The length of time people stay in the hospital varies from hours to days. This depends on the problem, the length of the operation, and whether
in strenuous physical activity – to maintain a low heart rate and low blood pressure – for around six weeks.Atrial fibrillation increases the risk of heart failure by 11 per 1000, kidney problems by 6 per 1000, death by 4 per 1000, stroke by 3 per 1000,
have a worse outcome overall than men. Evidence increasingly suggests that atrial fibrillation is independently associated with a higher risk of developing dementia. Prediction of embolism Among Danish men aged 50, with no risk factors, the 5-year risk of stroke was 1.1% and with AF alone
a higher risk of developing dementia. Prediction of embolism Among Danish men aged 50, with no risk factors, the 5-year risk of stroke was 1.1% and with AF alone 2.5%. For women the risks were slightly less, 0.7% and 2.1%. For
%. For women the risks were slightly less, 0.7% and 2.1%. For men aged 70, the 5-year risk of stroke was 4.8% and with AF alone 6.8%. For women aged 70 the risk was again lower than for men, 3.4%
3.4% with no added risk factor and 8.2% with AF.Determining the risk of an embolism causing a stroke is important for guiding the use of anticoagulants. The most accurate clinical prediction rules are:CHADS2CHA2DS2-VASc scoreBoth the CHADS2 and the CHA2DS2-VASc score predict future stroke risk
more accurate. Some that had a CHADS2 score of zero had a CHA2DS2-VASc score of three, with a 3.2% annual risk of stroke. Thus, a CHA2DS2-VASc score of zero is considered very low risk. Mechanism of thrombus formation In atrial fibrillation, the
, with a 3.2% annual risk of stroke. Thus, a CHA2DS2-VASc score of zero is considered very low risk. Mechanism of thrombus formation In atrial fibrillation, the lack of an organized atrial contraction can result in some stagnant blood in the left atrium (LA)
organized atrial contraction can result in some stagnant blood in the left atrium (LA) or left atrial appendage (LAA). This lack of movement of blood can lead to thrombus formation (blood clotting). If the clot becomes mobile and is carried away by the blood circulation
contraction can result in some stagnant blood in the left atrium (LA) or left atrial appendage (LAA). This lack of movement of blood can lead to thrombus formation (blood clotting). If the clot becomes mobile and is carried away by the blood circulation, it
until it plugs one of them and prevents blood from flowing through the artery. This process results in end organ damage due to the loss of nutrients, oxygen, and the removal of cellular waste products. Emboli in the brain may result in an ischemic stroke or a transient ischemic
removal of cellular waste products. Emboli in the brain may result in an ischemic stroke or a transient ischemic attack (TIA).More than 90% of cases of thrombi associated with non-valvular atrial fibrillation evolve in the left atrial appendage. However, the LAA lies in close relation to
cellular waste products. Emboli in the brain may result in an ischemic stroke or a transient ischemic attack (TIA).More than 90% of cases of thrombi associated with non-valvular atrial fibrillation evolve in the left atrial appendage. However, the LAA lies in close relation to the free
lies in close relation to the free wall of the left ventricle, and thus the LAA's emptying and filling, which determines its degree of blood stagnation, may be helped by the motion of the wall of the left ventricle if there is good ventricular function.Atrial fibrillation has
anticoagulants or warfarin may be somewhat protective against AF-associated dementia and evidence of silent ischemic strokes on MRI but this remains an active area of investigation.Atrial fibrillation is the most common arrhythmia and affects more than 33 million people worldwide. In Europe and North America, as of
of the population around 2005. In the developing world, rates are about 0.6% for males and 0.4% for females. The number of people diagnosed with AF has increased due to better detection of silent AF and increasing age and conditions that predispose to it.It also accounts
has increased due to better detection of silent AF and increasing age and conditions that predispose to it.It also accounts for one-third of hospital admissions for cardiac rhythm disturbances, and the rate of admissions for AF has risen in recent years. Strokes from AF account for 20–30
age and conditions that predispose to it.It also accounts for one-third of hospital admissions for cardiac rhythm disturbances, and the rate of admissions for AF has risen in recent years. Strokes from AF account for 20–30% of all ischemic strokes. After a transient ischemic attack
of congenital heart disease or structural heart disease in this demographic. As of 2001, it was anticipated that in developed countries, the number of people with atrial fibrillation was likely to increase during the following 50 years, owing to the growing proportion of elderly individuals.It is more
African descent than in populations of European descent. The African descent is associated with a protective effect of AF, due to the low presence of SNPs with guanine alleles, in comparison with the European ancestry. European ancestry has more frequent mutations. The variant rs4611994 for the gene PITX2
's anomaly, and those who underwent the Fontan procedure, are at higher risk with prevalence rates of up to 30% depending on the heart's anatomy and the person's age.Because the diagnosis of atrial fibrillation requires measurement of the electrical activity of the heart, atrial fibrillation was
anomaly, and those who underwent the Fontan procedure, are at higher risk with prevalence rates of up to 30% depending on the heart's anatomy and the person's age.Because the diagnosis of atrial fibrillation requires measurement of the electrical activity of the heart, atrial fibrillation was
who underwent the Fontan procedure, are at higher risk with prevalence rates of up to 30% depending on the heart's anatomy and the person's age.Because the diagnosis of atrial fibrillation requires measurement of the electrical activity of the heart, atrial fibrillation was not truly described until 1874
underwent the Fontan procedure, are at higher risk with prevalence rates of up to 30% depending on the heart's anatomy and the person's age.Because the diagnosis of atrial fibrillation requires measurement of the electrical activity of the heart, atrial fibrillation was not truly described until 1874
with AF was first recorded in 1876 by Carl Wilhelm Hermann Nothnagel and termed "delirium cordis", stating that "[I]n this form of arrhythmia the heartbeats follow each other in complete irregularity. At the same time, the height and tension of the individual pulse waves are continuously
each other in complete irregularity. At the same time, the height and tension of the individual pulse waves are continuously changing". Correlation of delirium cordis with the loss of atrial contraction, as reflected in the loss of a waves in the jugular venous pulse, was made by
. Willem Einthoven published the first ECG showing AF in 1906. The connection between the anatomic and electrical manifestations of AF and the irregular pulse of delirium cordis was made in 1909 by Carl Julius Rothberger, Heinrich Winterberg, and Sir Thomas Lewis.Atrial fibrillation occurs in other animals,
Le Heuzey J; Kay GN; Lowe JE; Olsson SB; Prystowsky EN; Tamargo JL (7 May 2013). "Management of patients with atrial fibrillation (compilation of 2006 ACCF/AHA/ESC and 2011 ACCF/AHA/HRS recommendations): a report of the

the immune system.  Unlike most non-Hodgkin lymphomas (which are generally B cell related), CTCL is caused by a mutation of T cells.  The cancerous T cells in the body initially migrate to the skin, causing various lesions to appear.  These lesions
half of all cases. A WHO-EORTC classification has been developed.There is no cure for CTCL, but there are a variety of treatment options available and some CTCL patients are able to live normal lives with this cancer, although symptoms can be debilitating and painful, even
a topical treatment for pruritus in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma to a pharmaceutical company called Elorac.Of all cancers involving lymphocytes, 2% of cases are cutaneous T cell lymphomas. CTCL is more common in men and in African-American people. The incidence of CTCL in men


, neuroblastoma occurs due to a genetic mutation occurring during early development. Rarely, it may be due to a mutation inherited from a person's parents. Environmental factors have not been found to be involved. Diagnosis is based on a tissue biopsy. Occasionally, it may be found
, the cancer has usually already spread. The cancer is divided into low-, intermediate-, and high-risk groups based on a child's age, cancer stage, and what the cancer looks like.Treatment and outcomes depends on the risk group a person is in. Treatments
most common cancer in children after leukemia and brain cancer. About one in every 7,000 children is affected at some time. About 90% of cases occur in children less than 5 years old, and it is rare in adults. Of cancer deaths in children, about 15%
Of cancer deaths in children, about 15% are due to neuroblastoma. The disease was first described in the 1800s.The first symptoms of neuroblastoma are often vague, making diagnosis difficult. Fatigue, loss of appetite, fever, and joint pain are common. Symptoms depend on
. The disease was first described in the 1800s.The first symptoms of neuroblastoma are often vague, making diagnosis difficult. Fatigue, loss of appetite, fever, and joint pain are common. Symptoms depend on primary tumor locations and metastases if present:In the abdomen, a
(i.e., the primary tumor) is in the adrenal glands.  This occurs in 40% of localized tumors and in 60% of cases of widespread disease. Neuroblastoma can also develop anywhere along the sympathetic nervous system chain from the neck to the pelvis.  Frequencies in
In rare cases, no primary tumor can be discerned.Rare but characteristic presentations include transverse myelopathy (tumor spinal cord compression, 5% of cases), treatment-resistant diarrhea (tumor vasoactive intestinal peptide secretion, 4% of cases), Horner's syndrome (cervical tumor
myelopathy (tumor spinal cord compression, 5% of cases), treatment-resistant diarrhea (tumor vasoactive intestinal peptide secretion, 4% of cases), Horner's syndrome (cervical tumor, 2.4% of cases), opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome and ataxia (suspected paraneoplastic cause,
treatment-resistant diarrhea (tumor vasoactive intestinal peptide secretion, 4% of cases), Horner's syndrome (cervical tumor, 2.4% of cases), opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome and ataxia (suspected paraneoplastic cause, 1.3% of cases), and hypertension (catecholamine secretion or kidney
, Horner's syndrome (cervical tumor, 2.4% of cases), opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome and ataxia (suspected paraneoplastic cause, 1.3% of cases), and hypertension (catecholamine secretion or kidney artery compression, 1.3% of cases).The cause of neuroblastoma is not well understood. The
syndrome and ataxia (suspected paraneoplastic cause, 1.3% of cases), and hypertension (catecholamine secretion or kidney artery compression, 1.3% of cases).The cause of neuroblastoma is not well understood. The great majority of cases are sporadic and nonfamilial. About 1–2% of cases run in
(suspected paraneoplastic cause, 1.3% of cases), and hypertension (catecholamine secretion or kidney artery compression, 1.3% of cases).The cause of neuroblastoma is not well understood. The great majority of cases are sporadic and nonfamilial. About 1–2% of cases run in families and have
, and hypertension (catecholamine secretion or kidney artery compression, 1.3% of cases).The cause of neuroblastoma is not well understood. The great majority of cases are sporadic and nonfamilial. About 1–2% of cases run in families and have been linked to specific gene mutations.  Familial neuroblastoma
, 1.3% of cases).The cause of neuroblastoma is not well understood. The great majority of cases are sporadic and nonfamilial. About 1–2% of cases run in families and have been linked to specific gene mutations.  Familial neuroblastoma in some cases is caused by rare germline mutations in
) gene. Germline mutations in the PHOX2B or KIF1B gene have been implicated in familial neuroblastoma, as well. Neuroblastoma is also a feature of neurofibromatosis type 1 and the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome.MYCN oncogene amplification within the tumor is a common finding in neuroblastoma. The degree of
of neurofibromatosis type 1 and the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome.MYCN oncogene amplification within the tumor is a common finding in neuroblastoma. The degree of amplification shows a bimodal distribution: either 3- to 10-fold, or 100- to 300-fold. The presence of this mutation is
: either 3- to 10-fold, or 100- to 300-fold. The presence of this mutation is highly correlated to advanced stages of disease.Duplicated segments of the LMO1 gene within neuroblastoma tumor cells have been shown to increase the risk of developing an aggressive form of the
factors; however, results have been inconclusive.Other studies have examined possible links with atopy and exposure to infection early in life, use of hormones and fertility drugs, and maternal use of hair dye.The diagnosis is usually confirmed by a surgical pathologist, taking into account the
Other studies have examined possible links with atopy and exposure to infection early in life, use of hormones and fertility drugs, and maternal use of hair dye.The diagnosis is usually confirmed by a surgical pathologist, taking into account the clinical presentation, microscopic findings, and other laboratory
not a sympathetic nervous system malignancy, esthesioneuroblastoma is a distinct clinical entity and is not to be confused with neuroblastoma.In about 90% of cases of neuroblastoma, elevated levels of catecholamines or their metabolites are found in the urine or blood. Catecholamines and their metabolites include dopamine,
sympathetic nervous system malignancy, esthesioneuroblastoma is a distinct clinical entity and is not to be confused with neuroblastoma.In about 90% of cases of neuroblastoma, elevated levels of catecholamines or their metabolites are found in the urine or blood. Catecholamines and their metabolites include dopamine, homovanillic acid
esthesioneuroblastoma is a distinct clinical entity and is not to be confused with neuroblastoma.In about 90% of cases of neuroblastoma, elevated levels of catecholamines or their metabolites are found in the urine or blood. Catecholamines and their metabolites include dopamine, homovanillic acid (HVA), and/or
When it is radio-iodinated with I-131 or I-123 (radioactive iodine isotopes), it is a very good radiopharmaceutical for diagnosis and monitoring of response to treatment for this disease. With a half-life of 13 hours, I-123 is the preferred isotope for imaging sensitivity and quality
lymphoma and Wilms' tumor.Neuroblastoma is one of the peripheral neuroblastic tumors (pNTs) that have similar origins and show a wide pattern of differentiation ranging from benign ganglioneuroma to stroma-rich ganglioneuroblastoma with neuroblastic cells intermixed or in nodules, to highly malignant neuroblastoma. This distinction in
established in 1986 and revised in 1988 stratifies neuroblastoma according to its anatomical presence at diagnosis:Stage 1: Localized tumor confined to the area of origin.Stage 2A: Unilateral tumor with incomplete gross resection; identifiable ipsilateral and contralateral lymph node negative for tumor.Stage 2B: Unilateral
lymph node involvement; or unilateral tumor with contralateral lymph node involvement; or midline tumor with bilateral lymph node involvement.Stage 4: Dissemination of tumor to distant lymph nodes, bone marrow, bone, liver, or other organs except as defined by Stage 4S.Stage 4S: Age <
) has been used, the need for an international consensus on risk assignment has also been recognized in order to compare similar cohorts in results of studies. Beginning in 2005, representatives of the major pediatric oncology cooperative groups have met to review data for 8,800 people with neuroblastoma treated in
When the lesion is localized, it is generally curable. However, long-term survival for children with advanced disease older than 18 months of age is poor despite aggressive multimodal therapy (intensive chemotherapy, surgery, radiation therapy, stem cell transplant, differentiation agent isotretinoin also called 13
to classic clinical staging, has allowed assignment to risk groups for planning treatment intensity. These criteria include the age of the person, extent of disease spread, microscopic appearance, and genetic features including DNA ploidy and N-myc oncogene amplification (N-myc regulates microRNAs),
into low, intermediate, and high risk disease. A recent biology study (COG ANBL00B1) analyzed 2687 people with neuroblastoma and the spectrum of risk assignment was determined: 37% of neuroblastoma cases are low risk, 18% are intermediate risk, and 45% are high risk
disease. A recent biology study (COG ANBL00B1) analyzed 2687 people with neuroblastoma and the spectrum of risk assignment was determined: 37% of neuroblastoma cases are low risk, 18% are intermediate risk, and 45% are high risk.  (There is some evidence that
(There is some evidence that the high- and low-risk types are caused by different mechanisms, and are not merely two different degrees of expression of the same mechanism.)The therapies for these different risk categories are very different.Low-risk disease can frequently be observed without any treatment
has found evidence that in children with high-risk neuroblastoma, treatment with myeloablative therapy improves event-free survival but may increase the risk of side effects such as kidney problems when compared to conventional chemotherapy.People with low and intermediate risk disease have an excellent prognosis with cure rates
In contrast, therapy for high-risk neuroblastoma the past two decades resulted in cures only about 30% of the time. The addition of antibody therapy has raised survival rates for high-risk disease significantly. In March 2009, an early analysis of a Children's Oncology Group
medical use in the United States in combination with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) to treat people one year of age and older with high-risk neuroblastoma in bone or bone marrow whose tumor did not respond to or has come back after previous treatments
a partial response, minor response, or stable disease to prior therapy.By data from England, the overall 5-year survival rate of neuroblastoma is 67%. Between 20% and 50% of high-risk cases do not respond adequately to induction high-dose chemotherapy
completion of frontline therapy is also common. Further treatment is available in phase I and phase II clinical trials that test new agents and combinations of agents against neuroblastoma, but the outcome remains very poor for relapsed high-risk disease.Most long-term survivors alive today had low
remains very poor for relapsed high-risk disease.Most long-term survivors alive today had low or intermediate risk disease and milder courses of treatment compared to high-risk disease. The majority of survivors have long-term effects from the treatment. Survivors of intermediate and high
long-term survivors alive today had low or intermediate risk disease and milder courses of treatment compared to high-risk disease. The majority of survivors have long-term effects from the treatment. Survivors of intermediate and high-risk treatment often experience hearing loss, growth reduction,
function disorders, learning difficulties, and greater risk of secondary cancers affect survivors of high-risk disease. An estimated two of three survivors of childhood cancer will ultimately develop at least one chronic and sometimes life-threatening health problem within 20 to 30 years after the cancer diagnosis.
series of 493 neuroblastoma samples, it has been reported that overall genomic pattern, as tested by array-based karyotyping, is a predictor of outcome in neuroblastoma:Tumors presenting exclusively with whole chromosome copy number changes were associated with excellent survival.Tumors presenting with any kind of segmental
copy number changes were associated with excellent survival.Tumors presenting with any kind of segmental chromosome copy number changes were associated with a high risk of relapse.Within tumors showing segmental alterations, additional independent predictors of decreased overall survival were N-myc amplification, 1p and 11q deletions,
copy number at these loci. SNP array virtual karyotyping is preferred for tumor samples, including neuroblastomas, because they can detect copy neutral loss of heterozygosity (acquired uniparental disomy). Copy neutral LOH can be biologically equivalent to a deletion and has been detected at key loci in neuroblastoma
neuroblastoma. ArrayCGH, FISH, or conventional cytogenetics cannot detect copy neutral LOH.Neuroblastoma comprises 6–10% of all childhood cancers, and 15% of cancer deaths in children. The annual mortality rate is 10 per million children in the 0- to 4-year-old age group,
4-year-old age group, and 4 per million in the 4- to 9-year old age group.The highest number of cases is in the first year of life, and some cases are congenital. The age range is broad, including older children and adults
, and 4 per million in the 4- to 9-year old age group.The highest number of cases is in the first year of life, and some cases are congenital. The age range is broad, including older children and adults, but only 10% of cases
year of life, and some cases are congenital. The age range is broad, including older children and adults, but only 10% of cases occur in people older than 5 years of age. A large European study reported less than 2% of over 4000 neuroblastoma cases were
. The age range is broad, including older children and adults, but only 10% of cases occur in people older than 5 years of age. A large European study reported less than 2% of over 4000 neuroblastoma cases were over 18 years old.In 1864 German physician
In 1864 German physician Rudolf Virchow was the first to describe an abdominal tumor in a child as a "glioma".  The characteristics of tumors from the sympathetic nervous system and the adrenal medulla were then noted in 1891 by German pathologist Felix Marchand. In 1901 the distinctive presentation
tumors from the sympathetic nervous system and the adrenal medulla were then noted in 1891 by German pathologist Felix Marchand. In 1901 the distinctive presentation of stage 4S in infants (liver but no bone metastases) was described by William Pepper. In 1910 James Homer Wright understood the tumor to
In 1910 James Homer Wright understood the tumor to originate from primitive neural cells, and named it neuroblastoma. He also noted the circular clumps of cells in bone marrow samples which are now termed "Homer Wright rosettes". Of note, "Homer-Wright" with a hyphen
Buenger, head of the history department at Texas A&M University.Neuroblastoma patient derived tumor xenografts (PDXs) have been created by orthotopic implantation of tumor samples into immunodeficient mice.  PDX models have several advantages over conventional cancer cell lines (CCL)s. Neuroblastoma PDXs retain the genetic hallmarks
the hypothesis that therapy could be successfully reduced for this risk group. Those with favorable characteristics (tumor grade and response) received four cycles of chemotherapy, and those with unfavorable characteristics received eight cycles, with three-year event free survival and overall survival stable at 90% for
event free survival and overall survival stable at 90% for the entire cohort. Future plans are to intensify treatment for those people with aberration of 1p36 or 11q23 chromosomes as well as for those who lack early response to treatment.By contrast, focus the past 20 years or more
By contrast, focus the past 20 years or more has been to intensify treatment for high-risk neuroblastoma. Chemotherapy induction variations, timing of surgery, stem cell transplant regimens, various delivery schemes for radiation, and use of monoclonal antibodies and retinoids to treat minimal residual disease continue
for a patient and managing the diagnosis, prognosis, prevention, treatment or  palliation of their injury or disease. Medicine encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness. Contemporary medicine applies biomedical sciences, biomedical research,
palliation of their injury or disease. Medicine encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness. Contemporary medicine applies biomedical sciences, biomedical research, genetics, and medical technology to diagnose, treat, and prevent injury and disease
and ionizing radiation, amongst others.Medicine has been practiced since prehistoric times, during most of which it was an art (an area of skill and knowledge) frequently having connections to the religious and philosophical beliefs of local culture. For example, a medicine man would apply herbs
, a medicine man would apply herbs and say prayers for healing, or an ancient philosopher and physician would apply bloodletting according to the theories of humorism. In recent centuries, since the advent of modern science, most medicine has become a combination of art and science (both basic
apply bloodletting according to the theories of humorism. In recent centuries, since the advent of modern science, most medicine has become a combination of art and science (both basic and applied, under the umbrella of medical science). While stitching technique for sutures is an art learned
learned through practice, the knowledge of what happens at the cellular and molecular level in the tissues being stitched arises through science.Prescientific forms of medicine are now known as traditional medicine and folk medicine. They remain commonly used with, or instead of, scientific medicine and are thus
remain commonly used with, or instead of, scientific medicine and are thus called alternative medicine. As an example, evidence on the effectiveness of acupuncture is "variable and inconsistent" for any condition, but is generally safe when done by an appropriately trained practitioner. In contrast,
treatments outside the bounds not just of scientific medicine, but also that of safety and efficacy are termed quackery. This can encompass an array of practices and practitioners, irrespective of whether they are prescientific (traditional medicine and folk medicine) or modern pseudo-scientific, including chiropractic which
of whether they are prescientific (traditional medicine and folk medicine) or modern pseudo-scientific, including chiropractic which rejects modern scientific germ theory of disease (instead believing without evidence that human diseases are caused by invisible subluxation of the bones, predominantly of the spine and less so of
diseases are caused by invisible subluxation of the bones, predominantly of the spine and less so of other bones), with just over half of chiropractors also rejecting the science of immunization.Medicine (UK:  (listen), US:  (listen)) is the
of the bones, predominantly of the spine and less so of other bones), with just over half of chiropractors also rejecting the science of immunization.Medicine (UK:  (listen), US:  (listen)) is the science and practice of the diagnosis
(listen), US:  (listen)) is the science and practice of the diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, and prevention of disease. The word "medicine" is derived from Latin medicus, meaning "a physician".Medical availability and clinical practice varies across the
for practitioners.In the developed world, evidence-based medicine is not universally used in clinical practice; for example, a 2007 survey of literature reviews found that about 49% of the interventions lacked sufficient evidence to support either benefit or harm.In modern clinical practice, physicians
the information provided. During the encounter, properly informing the patient of all relevant facts is an important part of the relationship and the development of trust. The medical encounter is then documented in the medical record, which is a legal document in many jurisdictions. Follow-ups may
duration of each one. Also called 'chief concern' or 'presenting complaint'.History of present illness (HPI): the chronological order of events of symptoms and further clarification of each symptom. Distinguishable from history of previous illness, often called past medical history (PMH).
each one. Also called 'chief concern' or 'presenting complaint'.History of present illness (HPI): the chronological order of events of symptoms and further clarification of each symptom. Distinguishable from history of previous illness, often called past medical history (PMH). Medical history
, residences, marital history, social and economic status, habits (including diet, medications, tobacco, alcohol).Family history (FH): listing of diseases in the family that may impact the patient. A family tree is sometimes used.Review of systems (ROS) or systems inquiry
, alcohol).Family history (FH): listing of diseases in the family that may impact the patient. A family tree is sometimes used.Review of systems (ROS) or systems inquiry: a set of additional questions to ask, which may be missed on HPI: a general enquiry
main organ systems (heart, lungs, digestive tract, urinary tract, etc.).The physical examination is the examination of the patient for medical signs of disease, which are objective and observable, in contrast to symptoms that are volunteered by the patient and not necessarily objectively observable. The healthcare
height, weight, body temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and hemoglobin oxygen saturationGeneral appearance of the patient and specific indicators of disease (nutritional status, presence of jaundice, pallor or clubbing)SkinHead, eye, ear, nose, and throat (HEENT)Cardiovascular (heart and
, spinal cord and peripheral nerves)Psychiatric (orientation, mental state, mood, evidence of abnormal perception or thought).It is to likely focus on areas of interest highlighted in the medical history and may not include everything listed above.The treatment plan may include ordering additional medical laboratory tests and medical
advised. Depending upon the health insurance plan and the managed care system, various forms of "utilization review", such as prior authorization of tests, may place barriers on accessing expensive services.The medical decision-making (MDM) process involves analysis and synthesis of all the
diagnoses (the differential diagnoses), along with an idea of what needs to be done to obtain a definitive diagnosis that would explain the patient's problem.On subsequent visits, the process may be repeated in an abbreviated manner to obtain any new history, symptoms, physical findings,
(the differential diagnoses), along with an idea of what needs to be done to obtain a definitive diagnosis that would explain the patient's problem.On subsequent visits, the process may be repeated in an abbreviated manner to obtain any new history, symptoms, physical findings,
compulsory private or co-operative health insurance. This is intended to ensure that the entire population has access to medical care on the basis of need rather than ability to pay. Delivery may be via private medical practices or by state-owned hospitals and clinics, or by charities
state-owned hospitals and clinics, or by charities, most commonly by a combination of all three.Most tribal societies provide no guarantee of healthcare for the population as a whole. In such societies, healthcare is available to those that can afford to pay for it or have
either directly or as part of an employment contract) or who may be covered by care financed by the government or tribe directly.Transparency of information is another factor defining a delivery system. Access to information on conditions, treatments, quality, and pricing greatly affects the choice by
choice by patients/consumers and, therefore, the incentives of medical professionals. While the US healthcare system has come under fire for lack of openness, new legislation may encourage greater openness. There is a perceived tension between the need for transparency on the one hand and such issues
openness. There is a perceived tension between the need for transparency on the one hand and such issues as patient confidentiality and the possible exploitation of information for commercial gain on the other.Provision of medical care is classified into primary, secondary, and tertiary care categories.Primary care
that "user fees" be removed in these areas to ensure access, although even after removal, significant costs and barriers remain.Separation of prescribing and dispensing is a practice in medicine and pharmacy in which the physician who provides a medical prescription is independent from the  pharmacist who
the physician who provides a medical prescription is independent from the  pharmacist who provides the prescription drug. In the Western world there are centuries of tradition for separating pharmacists from physicians. In Asian countries, it is traditional for physicians to also provide drugs.Working together as an interdisciplinary
podiatrists, physiotherapists, respiratory therapists, speech therapists, occupational therapists, radiographers, dietitians, and bioengineers, medical physics, surgeons, surgeon's assistant, surgical technologist.The scope and sciences underpinning human medicine overlap many other fields. Dentistry, while considered by some a separate discipline
radiology, to help diagnose or treat the main problem or any subsequent complications/developments.Physicians have many specializations and subspecializations into certain branches of medicine, which are listed below. There are variations from country to country regarding which specialties certain subspecialties are in.The main branches of
of medicine, which are listed below. There are variations from country to country regarding which specialties certain subspecialties are in.The main branches of medicine are:Basic sciences of medicine; this is what every physician is educated in, and some return to in biomedical researchMedical specialtiesInterdisciplinary fields
below. There are variations from country to country regarding which specialties certain subspecialties are in.The main branches of medicine are:Basic sciences of medicine; this is what every physician is educated in, and some return to in biomedical researchMedical specialtiesInterdisciplinary fields, where different medical specialties are
in biomedical researchMedical specialtiesInterdisciplinary fields, where different medical specialties are mixed to function in certain occasions.Anatomy is the study of the physical structure of organisms. In contrast to macroscopic or gross anatomy, cytology and histology are concerned with microscopic structures.Biochemistry is the study of the chemistry
the structure and function of their chemical components.Biomechanics is the study of the structure and function of biological systems by means of the methods of Mechanics.Biostatistics is the application of statistics to biological fields in the broadest sense. A knowledge of biostatistics is essential in the planning,
components.Biomechanics is the study of the structure and function of biological systems by means of the methods of Mechanics.Biostatistics is the application of statistics to biological fields in the broadest sense. A knowledge of biostatistics is essential in the planning, evaluation, and interpretation of medical research
biological systems by means of the methods of Mechanics.Biostatistics is the application of statistics to biological fields in the broadest sense. A knowledge of biostatistics is essential in the planning, evaluation, and interpretation of medical research. It is also fundamental to epidemiology and evidence-based medicine
interpretation of medical research. It is also fundamental to epidemiology and evidence-based medicine.Biophysics is an interdisciplinary science that uses the methods of physics and physical chemistry to study biological systems.Cytology is the microscopic study of individual cells.Embryology is the study of the early development
physics and physical chemistry to study biological systems.Cytology is the microscopic study of individual cells.Embryology is the study of the early development of organisms.Endocrinology is the study of hormones and their effect throughout the body of animals.Epidemiology is the study of the demographics of disease
systems.Cytology is the microscopic study of individual cells.Embryology is the study of the early development of organisms.Endocrinology is the study of hormones and their effect throughout the body of animals.Epidemiology is the study of the demographics of disease processes, and includes, but is
individual cells.Embryology is the study of the early development of organisms.Endocrinology is the study of hormones and their effect throughout the body of animals.Epidemiology is the study of the demographics of disease processes, and includes, but is not limited to, the study of epidemics
development of organisms.Endocrinology is the study of hormones and their effect throughout the body of animals.Epidemiology is the study of the demographics of disease processes, and includes, but is not limited to, the study of epidemics.Genetics is the study of genes, and their
body of animals.Epidemiology is the study of the demographics of disease processes, and includes, but is not limited to, the study of epidemics.Genetics is the study of genes, and their role in biological inheritance.Histology is the study of the structures of biological tissues
study of the demographics of disease processes, and includes, but is not limited to, the study of epidemics.Genetics is the study of genes, and their role in biological inheritance.Histology is the study of the structures of biological tissues by light microscopy, electron microscopy and
the immune system, which includes the innate and adaptive immune system in humans, for example.Medical physics is the study of the applications of physics principles in medicine.Microbiology is the study of microorganisms, including protozoa, bacteria, fungi, and viruses.Molecular biology is the
immune system in humans, for example.Medical physics is the study of the applications of physics principles in medicine.Microbiology is the study of microorganisms, including protozoa, bacteria, fungi, and viruses.Molecular biology is the study of molecular underpinnings of the process of replication,
the study of microorganisms, including protozoa, bacteria, fungi, and viruses.Molecular biology is the study of molecular underpinnings of the process of replication, transcription and translation of the genetic material.Neuroscience includes those disciplines of science that are related to the study of the nervous system
Molecular biology is the study of molecular underpinnings of the process of replication, transcription and translation of the genetic material.Neuroscience includes those disciplines of science that are related to the study of the nervous system. A main focus of neuroscience is the biology and physiology of the human brain
translation of the genetic material.Neuroscience includes those disciplines of science that are related to the study of the nervous system. A main focus of neuroscience is the biology and physiology of the human brain and spinal cord. Some related clinical specialties include neurology, neurosurgery and psychiatry.Nutrition
specialties include neurology, neurosurgery and psychiatry.Nutrition science (theoretical focus) and dietetics (practical focus) is the study of the relationship of food and drink to health and disease, especially in determining an optimal diet. Medical nutrition therapy is done by dietitians and is prescribed for
for diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, weight and eating disorders, allergies, malnutrition, and neoplastic diseases.Pathology as a science is the study of disease—the causes, course, progression and resolution thereof.Pharmacology is the study of drugs and their actions.Gynecology is the study
diseases.Pathology as a science is the study of disease—the causes, course, progression and resolution thereof.Pharmacology is the study of drugs and their actions.Gynecology is the study of female reproductive system.Photobiology is the study of the interactions between non-ionizing radiation
the underlying regulatory mechanisms.Radiobiology is the study of the interactions between ionizing radiation and living organisms.Toxicology is the study of hazardous effects of drugs and poisons.In the broadest meaning of "medicine", there are many different specialties. In the UK, most specialities have
"Royal". The development of a speciality is often driven by new technology (such as the development of effective anaesthetics) or ways of working (such as emergency departments); the new specialty leads to the formation of a unifying body of doctors and the prestige of administering
of effective anaesthetics) or ways of working (such as emergency departments); the new specialty leads to the formation of a unifying body of doctors and the prestige of administering their own examination.Within medical circles, specialities usually fit into one of two broad categories: "Medicine
Surgery, which in the UK leads to membership of the Royal College of Surgeons of England (MRCS). At present, some specialties of medicine do not fit easily into either of these categories, such as radiology, pathology, or anesthesia. Most of these have branched from
, transplant surgery, trauma surgery, urology, vascular surgery, and pediatric surgery. In some centers, anesthesiology is part of the division of surgery (for historical and logistical reasons), although it is not a surgical discipline. Other medical specialties may employ surgical procedures, such
ophthalmology and dermatology, but are not considered surgical sub-specialties per se.Surgical training in the U.S. requires a minimum of five years of residency after medical school. Sub-specialties of surgery often require seven or more years. In addition, fellowships can last an additional one
sub-specialties per se.Surgical training in the U.S. requires a minimum of five years of residency after medical school. Sub-specialties of surgery often require seven or more years. In addition, fellowships can last an additional one to three years. Because post-residency fellowships
can be very difficult and time-consuming. Internal specialty Internal medicine is the medical specialty dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of adult diseases. According to some sources, an emphasis on internal structures is implied. In North America, specialists in internal medicine are commonly
are often called physicians. These terms, internist or physician (in the narrow sense, common outside North America), generally exclude practitioners of gynecology and obstetrics, pathology, psychiatry, and especially surgery and its subspecialities.Because their patients are often seriously ill or require complex investigations
of their work in hospitals. Formerly, many internists were not subspecialized; such general physicians would see any complex nonsurgical problem; this style of practice has become much less common. In modern urban practice, most internists are subspecialists: that is, they generally limit their medical practice
of Nations and some other countries, specialist pediatricians and geriatricians are also described as specialist physicians (or internists) who have subspecialized by age of patient rather than by organ system. Elsewhere, especially in North America, general pediatrics is often a form of primary care.There are
across the world: see the articles on medical education and physician for more details. In North America, it requires at least three years of residency training after medical school, which can then be followed by a one- to three-year fellowship in the subspecialties listed above. In
than 48 hours per week on average. Diagnostic specialties Clinical laboratory sciences are the clinical diagnostic services that apply laboratory techniques to diagnosis and management of patients. In the United States, these services are supervised by a pathologist. The personnel that work in these medical laboratory departments are technically
include transfusion medicine, cellular pathology, clinical chemistry, hematology, clinical microbiology and clinical immunology.Pathology as a medical specialty is the branch of medicine that deals with the study of diseases and the morphologic, physiologic changes produced by them. As a diagnostic specialty, pathology can be
clinical chemistry, hematology, clinical microbiology and clinical immunology.Pathology as a medical specialty is the branch of medicine that deals with the study of diseases and the morphologic, physiologic changes produced by them. As a diagnostic specialty, pathology can be considered the basis of modern scientific medical
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), immunohistochemistry, cytogenetics, gene rearrangements studies and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) fall within the territory of pathology.Diagnostic radiology is concerned with imaging of the body, e.g. by x-rays, x-ray computed tomography, ultrasonography,
flow, or other), and a radionuclide (usually either a gamma-emitter or a positron emitter). There is a degree of overlap between nuclear medicine and radiology, as evidenced by the emergence of combined devices such as the PET/CT scanner.Clinical neurophysiology is
CT scanner.Clinical neurophysiology is concerned with testing the physiology or function of the central and peripheral aspects of the nervous system. These kinds of tests can be divided into recordings of: (1) spontaneous or continuously running electrical activity, or (2) stimulus evoked responses.
of the above-mentioned groups:Anesthesiology (also known as anaesthetics): concerned with the perioperative management of the surgical patient. The anesthesiologist's role during surgery is to prevent derangement in the vital organs' (i.e. brain, heart, kidneys) functions and postoperative pain. Outside
, the first port-of-call for patients with non-emergency medical problems. Family physicians often provide services across a broad range of settings including office based practices, emergency department coverage, inpatient care, and nursing home care.Obstetrics and gynecology (often abbreviated as OB
the eye and ocular adnexa, combining conservative and surgical therapy.Pediatrics (AE) or paediatrics (BE) is devoted to the care of infants, children, and adolescents. Like internal medicine, there are many pediatric subspecialties for specific age ranges, organ systems, disease classes
, and adolescents. Like internal medicine, there are many pediatric subspecialties for specific age ranges, organ systems, disease classes, and sites of care delivery.Pharmaceutical medicine is the medical scientific discipline concerned with the discovery, development, evaluation, registration, monitoring and medical aspects of
of care delivery.Pharmaceutical medicine is the medical scientific discipline concerned with the discovery, development, evaluation, registration, monitoring and medical aspects of marketing of medicines for the benefit of patients and public health.Physical medicine and rehabilitation (or physiatry) is concerned with functional improvement after
delivery.Pharmaceutical medicine is the medical scientific discipline concerned with the discovery, development, evaluation, registration, monitoring and medical aspects of marketing of medicines for the benefit of patients and public health.Physical medicine and rehabilitation (or physiatry) is concerned with functional improvement after injury,
the medical scientific discipline concerned with the discovery, development, evaluation, registration, monitoring and medical aspects of marketing of medicines for the benefit of patients and public health.Physical medicine and rehabilitation (or physiatry) is concerned with functional improvement after injury, illness, or congenital disorders
with functional improvement after injury, illness, or congenital disorders.Podiatric medicine is the study of, diagnosis, and medical & surgical treatment of disorders of the foot, ankle, lower limb, hip and lower back.Psychiatry is the branch of medicine concerned with the bio-
, and medical & surgical treatment of disorders of the foot, ankle, lower limb, hip and lower back.Psychiatry is the branch of medicine concerned with the bio-psycho-social study of the etiology, diagnosis, treatment and prevention of cognitive, perceptual, emotional and
of cognitive, perceptual, emotional and behavioral disorders. Related non-medical fields include psychotherapy and clinical psychology.Preventive medicine is the branch of medicine concerned with preventing disease.Community health or public health is an aspect of health services concerned with threats to the overall health of a
include psychotherapy and clinical psychology.Preventive medicine is the branch of medicine concerned with preventing disease.Community health or public health is an aspect of health services concerned with threats to the overall health of a community based on population health analysis.Some interdisciplinary sub-specialties of medicine include
an aspect of health services concerned with threats to the overall health of a community based on population health analysis.Some interdisciplinary sub-specialties of medicine include:Aerospace medicine deals with medical problems related to flying and space travel.Addiction medicine deals with the treatment of addiction.Medical
sub-specialties of medicine include:Aerospace medicine deals with medical problems related to flying and space travel.Addiction medicine deals with the treatment of addiction.Medical ethics deals with ethical and moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine.Biomedical Engineering is a field
.Addiction medicine deals with the treatment of addiction.Medical ethics deals with ethical and moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine.Biomedical Engineering is a field dealing with the application of engineering principles to medical practice.Clinical pharmacology is concerned with how systems of
deals with ethical and moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine.Biomedical Engineering is a field dealing with the application of engineering principles to medical practice.Clinical pharmacology is concerned with how systems of therapeutics interact with patients.Conservation medicine studies the relationship between human
of medicine.Biomedical Engineering is a field dealing with the application of engineering principles to medical practice.Clinical pharmacology is concerned with how systems of therapeutics interact with patients.Conservation medicine studies the relationship between human and animal health, and environmental conditions. Also known as ecological medicine,
animal health, and environmental conditions. Also known as ecological medicine, environmental medicine, or medical geology.Disaster medicine deals with medical aspects of emergency preparedness, disaster mitigation and management.Diving medicine (or hyperbaric medicine) is the prevention and treatment of diving-related problems.
medicine deals with medical aspects of emergency preparedness, disaster mitigation and management.Diving medicine (or hyperbaric medicine) is the prevention and treatment of diving-related problems.Evolutionary medicine is a perspective on medicine derived through applying evolutionary theory.Forensic medicine deals with medical questions in legal
on medicine derived through applying evolutionary theory.Forensic medicine deals with medical questions in legal context, such as determination of the time and cause of death, type of weapon used to inflict trauma, reconstruction of the facial features using remains of deceased (skull) thus aiding identification.
applying evolutionary theory.Forensic medicine deals with medical questions in legal context, such as determination of the time and cause of death, type of weapon used to inflict trauma, reconstruction of the facial features using remains of deceased (skull) thus aiding identification.Gender-based medicine
. The term Most Responsible Physician (MRP) or attending physician is also used interchangeably to describe this role.Laser medicine involves the use of lasers in the diagnostics or treatment of various conditions.Medical humanities includes the humanities (literature, philosophy, ethics, history and religion)
, and visual arts) and their application to medical education and practice.Health informatics is a relatively recent field that deal with the application of computers and information technology to medicine.Nosology is the classification of diseases for various purposes.Nosokinetics is the science/subject of measuring and
practice.Health informatics is a relatively recent field that deal with the application of computers and information technology to medicine.Nosology is the classification of diseases for various purposes.Nosokinetics is the science/subject of measuring and modelling the process of care in health and social care systems.
technology to medicine.Nosology is the classification of diseases for various purposes.Nosokinetics is the science/subject of measuring and modelling the process of care in health and social care systems.Occupational medicine is the provision of health advice to organizations and individuals to ensure that the highest standards
Nosokinetics is the science/subject of measuring and modelling the process of care in health and social care systems.Occupational medicine is the provision of health advice to organizations and individuals to ensure that the highest standards of health and safety at work can be achieved and maintained.Pain management
care in health and social care systems.Occupational medicine is the provision of health advice to organizations and individuals to ensure that the highest standards of health and safety at work can be achieved and maintained.Pain management (also called pain medicine, or algiatry) is the medical discipline
work can be achieved and maintained.Pain management (also called pain medicine, or algiatry) is the medical discipline concerned with the relief of pain.Pharmacogenomics is a form of individualized medicine.Podiatric medicine is the study of, diagnosis, and medical treatment of disorders of the
with the relief of pain.Pharmacogenomics is a form of individualized medicine.Podiatric medicine is the study of, diagnosis, and medical treatment of disorders of the foot, ankle, lower limb, hip and lower back.Sexual medicine is concerned with diagnosing, assessing and treating all
Sexual medicine is concerned with diagnosing, assessing and treating all disorders related to sexuality.Sports medicine deals with the treatment and prevention and rehabilitation of sports/exercise injuries such as muscle spasms, muscle tears, injuries to ligaments (ligament tears or ruptures) and their repair in athletes
ligament tears or ruptures) and their repair in athletes, amateur and professional.Therapeutics is the field, more commonly referenced in earlier periods of history, of the various remedies that can be used to treat disease and promote health.Travel medicine or emporiatrics deals with health problems of
department. In some jurisdictions this function is combined with the emergency department.Veterinary medicine; veterinarians apply similar techniques as physicians to the care of animals.Wilderness medicine entails the practice of medicine in the wild, where conventional medical facilities may not be available.Many other health science
combined with the emergency department.Veterinary medicine; veterinarians apply similar techniques as physicians to the care of animals.Wilderness medicine entails the practice of medicine in the wild, where conventional medical facilities may not be available.Many other health science fields, e.g. dieteticsMedical education and training varies
school, followed by a period of supervised practice or internship, or residency. This can be followed by postgraduate vocational training. A variety of teaching methods have been employed in medical education, still itself a focus of active research. In Canada and the United States of America,
education. Medical practitioners upgrade their knowledge in various ways, including medical journals, seminars, conferences, and online programs.  A database of objectives covering medical knowledge, as suggested by national societies across the United States, can be searched at http://data.medobjectives.marian.edu/.In most countries, it is a
require medical doctors to be trained in "evidence based", Western, or Hippocratic Medicine, they are not intended to discourage different paradigms of health.In the European Union, the profession of doctor of medicine is regulated. A profession is said to be regulated when access and
", Western, or Hippocratic Medicine, they are not intended to discourage different paradigms of health.In the European Union, the profession of doctor of medicine is regulated. A profession is said to be regulated when access and exercise is subject to the possession of a specific professional
Western, or Hippocratic Medicine, they are not intended to discourage different paradigms of health.In the European Union, the profession of doctor of medicine is regulated. A profession is said to be regulated when access and exercise is subject to the possession of a specific professional qualification.
access and exercise is subject to the possession of a specific professional qualification.The regulated professions database contains a list of regulated professions for doctor of medicine in the EU member states, EEA countries and Switzerland. This list is covered by the Directive 2005/36/EC.Doctors who are negligent or
states, EEA countries and Switzerland. This list is covered by the Directive 2005/36/EC.Doctors who are negligent or intentionally harmful in their care of patients can face charges of medical malpractice and be subject to civil, criminal, or professional sanctions.Medical ethics is a system of moral
subject to civil, criminal, or professional sanctions.Medical ethics is a system of moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine. As a scholarly discipline, medical ethics encompasses its practical application in clinical settings as well as work on its history, philosophy,
-medical community. Conflicts can also arise between health care providers, or among family members. For example, some argue that the principles of autonomy and beneficence clash when patients refuse blood transfusions, considering them life-saving; and truth-telling was not emphasized to a large
magically obtaining the truth). The field of medical anthropology examines the ways in which culture and society are organized around or impacted by issues of health, health care and related issues.Early records on medicine have been discovered from ancient Egyptian medicine, Babylonian Medicine, Ayurvedic medicine (
work on surgery, while the Ebers Papyrus dating back to 1500 BCE is akin to a textbook on medicine.In China, archaeological evidence of medicine in Chinese dates back to the Bronze Age Shang Dynasty, based on seeds for herbalism and tools presumed to have been used for surgery
including brain and eye surgeries. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages, the Greek tradition of medicine went into decline in Western Europe, although it continued uninterrupted in the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.Most of our knowledge of
rituals. The Hebrew contribution to the development of modern medicine started in the Byzantine Era, with the physician Asaph the Jew.The concept of hospital as institution to offer medical care and possibility of a cure for the patients due to the ideals of Christian charity, rather than just
due to the ideals of Christian charity, rather than just merely a place to die, appeared in the Byzantine Empire.Although the concept of uroscopy was known to Galen, he did not see the importance of using it to localize the disease. It was under the Byzantines with
Notable Islamic medical pioneers include the Persian polymath, Avicenna, who, along with Imhotep and Hippocrates, has also been called the "father of medicine". He wrote The Canon of Medicine which became a standard medical text at many medieval European universities, considered one of the most
The Canon of Medicine which became a standard medical text at many medieval European universities, considered one of the most famous books in the history of medicine. Others include Abulcasis, Avenzoar, Ibn al-Nafis, and Averroes. Persian  physician Rhazes was one of the first to
Abulcasis, Avenzoar, Ibn al-Nafis, and Averroes. Persian  physician Rhazes was one of the first to question the Greek theory of humorism, which nevertheless remained influential in both medieval Western and medieval Islamic medicine. Some volumes of Rhazes's work Al-Mansuri, namely
A General Book on Therapy", became part of the medical curriculum in European universities. Additionally, he has been described as a doctor's doctor, the father of pediatrics, and a pioneer of ophthalmology. For example, he was the first to recognize the reaction of the
", became part of the medical curriculum in European universities. Additionally, he has been described as a doctor's doctor, the father of pediatrics, and a pioneer of ophthalmology. For example, he was the first to recognize the reaction of the eye's pupil to light
medical curriculum in European universities. Additionally, he has been described as a doctor's doctor, the father of pediatrics, and a pioneer of ophthalmology. For example, he was the first to recognize the reaction of the eye's pupil to light. The Persian Bimaristan hospitals were
doctor, the father of pediatrics, and a pioneer of ophthalmology. For example, he was the first to recognize the reaction of the eye's pupil to light. The Persian Bimaristan hospitals were an early example of public hospitals.In Europe, Charlemagne decreed that a hospital should be
, the father of pediatrics, and a pioneer of ophthalmology. For example, he was the first to recognize the reaction of the eye's pupil to light. The Persian Bimaristan hospitals were an early example of public hospitals.In Europe, Charlemagne decreed that a hospital should be
herbs and becoming the chief medical care givers of their districts, as at the great Abbey of Cluny. The Church also established a network of cathedral schools and universities where medicine was studied. The Schola Medica Salernitana in Salerno, looking to the learning of Greek and Arab physicians,
his life in 1553. Later this was described by Renaldus Columbus and Andrea Cesalpino. Herman Boerhaave is sometimes referred to as a "father of physiology" due to his exemplary teaching in Leiden and textbook 'Institutiones medicae' (1708). Pierre Fauchard has been called "the
The modern era really began with Edward Jenner's discovery of the smallpox vaccine at the end of the 18th century (inspired by the method of inoculation earlier practiced in Asia), Robert Koch's discoveries around 1880 of the transmission of disease by bacteria, and then the discovery of
of the 18th century (inspired by the method of inoculation earlier practiced in Asia), Robert Koch's discoveries around 1880 of the transmission of disease by bacteria, and then the discovery of antibiotics around 1900.The post-18th century modernity period brought more groundbreaking researchers from Europe. From Germany and
of inoculation earlier practiced in Asia), Robert Koch's discoveries around 1880 of the transmission of disease by bacteria, and then the discovery of antibiotics around 1900.The post-18th century modernity period brought more groundbreaking researchers from Europe. From Germany and Austria, doctors Rudolf Virchow, Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen
) discovered by Paul Ehrlich in 1908 after he observed that bacteria took up toxic dyes that human cells did not. The first major class of antibiotics was the sulfa drugs, derived by German chemists originally from azo dyes.Pharmacology has become increasingly sophisticated; modern biotechnology allows drugs targeted
evolution is having increasingly significant influence on medicine, as the causative genes of most monogenic genetic disorders have now been identified, and the development of techniques in molecular biology, evolution, and genetics are influencing medical technology, practice and decision-making.Evidence-based medicine is a
genetics are influencing medical technology, practice and decision-making.Evidence-based medicine is a contemporary movement to establish the most effective algorithms of practice (ways of doing things) through the use of systematic reviews and meta-analysis. The movement is facilitated by modern global information
As of 2015, most wealthy developed countries provide health care to all citizens, with a few exceptions such as the United States where lack of health insurance coverage may limit access.The World Health Organization (WHO) defines traditional medicine as "the sum total of the knowledge,
, and practices based on the theories, beliefs, and experiences indigenous to different cultures, whether explicable or not, used in the maintenance of health as well as in the prevention, diagnosis, improvement or treatment of physical and mental illness." Practices known as traditional medicines include
Court of India stated in 2018 that "unqualified, untrained quacks are posing a great risk to the entire society and playing with the lives of people without having the requisite training and education in the science from approved institutions".

pleomorphic sarcoma, previously malignant fibrous histiocytoma, is a type of cancer, namely a soft-tissue sarcoma.It is considered a diagnosis of exclusion for sarcomas that cannot be more precisely categorized. Other sarcomas are cancers that form in bone and soft tissues, including muscle,
almost all cases radiation. Radiation eliminates the need for limb amputation and there is level I evidence to show that it leads to equivalent rates of survival (Rosenberg et al. NCI).  Radiation may be delivered either pre-op or post-op depending on surgeon and
et al. NCI).  Radiation may be delivered either pre-op or post-op depending on surgeon and multidisciplinary tumor board's recommendations.  Radiation can be omitted for low grade, Stage I excised tumors with >1 cm margin (NCCN).  Chemotherapy
local control.  However, neither surgery nor SBRT will prevent emergence of additional metastases elsewhere in the lung.  Therefore, the role of chemotherapy needs to be further explored to address systemic metastasis.Prognosis depends on the primary tumor grade (appearance under the microscope as judged by
appearance under the microscope as judged by a pathologist), size, resectability (whether it can be completely removed surgically), and presence of metastases.  The five-year survival rate is 80%. High expression levels of AMPD2 have been shown to correlate with poor patient
positive oropharyngeal cancer, which is caused by an oral human papillomavirus infection; and HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer, which is linked to use of alcohol, tobacco, or both.Oropharyngeal cancer is diagnosed by biopsy of observed abnormal tissue in the throat. OPC is staged according to
there are nearly 200 distinct human papillomaviruses (HPVs), and many HPV types are carcinogenic.Smoking and chewing tobacco (see Health effects of tobacco);Heavy alcohol use (see Long-term effects of alcohol consumption).A diet low in fruits and vegetables;Chewing paan (betel quid), a stimulant
, and many HPV types are carcinogenic.Smoking and chewing tobacco (see Health effects of tobacco);Heavy alcohol use (see Long-term effects of alcohol consumption).A diet low in fruits and vegetables;Chewing paan (betel quid), a stimulant commonly used in Southern and Southeast Asia;Marijuana smoking (see
consumption).A diet low in fruits and vegetables;Chewing paan (betel quid), a stimulant commonly used in Southern and Southeast Asia;Marijuana smoking (see Effects of cannabis);Asbestos exposure (see Asbestos-related diseases);Certain genetic changes including: P53 mutation and CDKN2A (p16) mutations;Poor nutrition;Plummer–Vinson syndrome. High
research conducted in 2017 demonstrated that HPV vaccination induces HPV antibodies levels at the oral cavity that correlate with circulating levels.Regarding the primary prevention of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer, safe oral sex habits should be advised (see Sex education). Regarding the primary prevention of HPV-
primary prevention of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer, safe oral sex habits should be advised (see Sex education). Regarding the primary prevention of HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer, educating people on the risks of chewing betel quid, alcohol use, and tobacco smoking is of the prime

and a bone fracture. The most common areas where it begins are the legs, pelvis, and chest wall. In about 25% of cases, the cancer has already spread to other parts of the body at the time of diagnosis. Complications may include a pleural effusion or
, and chest wall. In about 25% of cases, the cancer has already spread to other parts of the body at the time of diagnosis. Complications may include a pleural effusion or paraplegia.The cause of Ewing sarcoma is unknown. Most cases appear to occur randomly.
. Most cases appear to occur randomly. It is sometimes grouped together with primitive neuroectodermal tumors, in a category known as the Ewing family of tumors. The underlying mechanism often involves a genetic change known as a reciprocal translocation. Diagnosis is based on biopsy of the tumor.Treatment
, surgery, and stem cell transplant. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy are being studied. Five year survival is about 70%. A number of factors, however, affect this estimate.James Ewing in 1920 established that the tumor is a distinct type of cancer. It affects about
70%. A number of factors, however, affect this estimate.James Ewing in 1920 established that the tumor is a distinct type of cancer. It affects about one in a million people per year in the United States. Ewing sarcoma occurs most often in teenagers and young
one in a million people per year in the United States. Ewing sarcoma occurs most often in teenagers and young adults and represents 2% of childhood cancers. Caucasians are affected more often than African Americans or Asians. Males are affected more often than females.Ewing sarcoma is more
more common in males (1.6 male:1 female) and usually presents in childhood or early adulthood, with a peak between 10 and 20 years of age. It can occur anywhere in the body but most commonly in the pelvis and proximal long tubular bones, especially around the growth plates
are the most common sites, followed by the tibia and the humerus. Thirty percent are overtly metastatic at presentation. 10-15% of people present with a pathologic fracture at the time of diagnosis. People usually experience extreme bone pain. Rarely, it can develop in the
and the humerus. Thirty percent are overtly metastatic at presentation. 10-15% of people present with a pathologic fracture at the time of diagnosis. People usually experience extreme bone pain. Rarely, it can develop in the vagina.Signs and symptoms include intermittent fevers, anemia
genetic event; a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22, t(11,22), which fuses the Ewing's Sarcoma Breakpoint Region 1(EWSR1) gene of chromosome 22 (which encodes the EWS protein) to the Friend Leukemia Virus Integration 1 (FLI1) gene (which encodes Friend Leukemia Integration
which occurs mostly in areas corresponding to transcription enhancers), leading to increased gene expression. The EWS-FLI1 fusion protein inhibits certain microRNAs of cells (such as miRNA-145). MiRNA-145 normally activates RNA-induced silencing complexes (RISCs) to inhibit or degrade mRNA that is involved
degrade mRNA that is involved in cell pluripotency. Thus, ESW-FLI1 inhibition of the microRNA miRNA-145 leads to increased pluripotency and decreased differentiation of cells and increased oncogenesis.A genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified three susceptibility loci located on chromosomes 1, 10 and 15
, typical findings of Ewing's Sarcoma consist of multiple confluent lytic bone lesions that have a "moth eaten" pattern due to permeative destruction of bone. There will also be a displaced periosteum as the new sub-periosteal layer of bone begins to grow on top of the tumor
"moth eaten" pattern due to permeative destruction of bone. There will also be a displaced periosteum as the new sub-periosteal layer of bone begins to grow on top of the tumor. This raised or displaced periosteum is consistent with the classic radiographic finding of the Codman triangle
on top of the tumor. This raised or displaced periosteum is consistent with the classic radiographic finding of the Codman triangle. The proliferative reaction of bone can also create delicate laminations constituting the periosteal layers and giving the radiographic appearance of an onion peel. Plain films add valuable information in
layers and giving the radiographic appearance of an onion peel. Plain films add valuable information in the initial evaluation or screening. The wide zone of transition (e.g. permeative) is the most useful plain film characteristic in differentiation of benign versus aggressive or malignant lytic lesions.Magnetic resonance imaging
does not give additional information over noncontrast studies, though some current researchers argue that dynamic, contrast-enhanced MRI may help determine the amount of necrosis within the tumor, thus help in determining response to treatment prior to surgery.Computed axial tomography (CT) can also be used
have a similar appearance. Accumulating evidence suggests that EWSR1-NFATc2 positive sarcomas, which were previously considered to possibly belong to the Ewing family of tumors, differ from Ewing sarcoma in their genetics, transcriptomes, and epigentic and epidemiological profiles, indicating that they might represent a distinct tumor
well as local disease control with surgery and/or radiation. An aggressive approach is necessary because almost all people with apparently localized disease at the time of diagnosis actually have asymptomatic metastatic disease.The surgical resection may involve limb salvage or amputation. Complete excision at the time of biopsy may be
at the time of diagnosis actually have asymptomatic metastatic disease.The surgical resection may involve limb salvage or amputation. Complete excision at the time of biopsy may be performed if malignancy is confirmed at the time it is examined. Treatment lengths vary depending on location and stage of the disease
EWS-ETS gene translocation. In addition, the synthetic retinoid derivative fenretinide (4-hydroxy(phenyl)retinamide) has been reported to induce high levels of cell death in Ewing sarcoma cell lines in vitro and to delay growth of xenografts in in vivo mouse models.In most pediatric cancers including
(4-hydroxy(phenyl)retinamide) has been reported to induce high levels of cell death in Ewing sarcoma cell lines in vitro and to delay growth of xenografts in in vivo mouse models.In most pediatric cancers including sarcoma, proton beam radiation (also known as proton therapy) delivers an
the surrounding normal tissue compared to photon radiation.Staging attempts to distinguish people with localized from those with metastatic disease. The most common areas of metastasis are the lungs, bone and bone marrow with less common areas of metastasis being the lymph nodes liver and brain. The presence of
with localized from those with metastatic disease. The most common areas of metastasis are the lungs, bone and bone marrow with less common areas of metastasis being the lymph nodes liver and brain. The presence of metastatic disease is the most important prognostic factor in Ewing's Sarcoma with the
the most important prognostic factor in Ewing's Sarcoma with the 5 year survival rate being only 30% when metastasis is present at the time of diagnosis as compared to a 70% 5 year survival rate with no metastasis present. Another important prognostic factor is the location of the primary
more distal tumors. Other factors associated with a poor prognosis include a large primary neoplasm, older age at diagnosis (older than 18 years of age) and increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels.Five-year survival for localized disease is greater than 70% after therapy.
tumor relapse.Ewing sarcomas represent 16% of primary bone sarcomas. In the United States, they are most common in the second decade of life, with a rate of 0.3 cases per million in children under 3 years of age, and as high as 4.6 cases per million
States, they are most common in the second decade of life, with a rate of 0.3 cases per million in children under 3 years of age, and as high as 4.6 cases per million in adolescents aged 15–19 years. Internationally, the annual incidence rate averages less than 2
2 cases per million children.In the United Kingdom, an average of six children per year are diagnosed, mainly males in early stages of puberty.  Due to the prevalence of diagnosis during teenage years, a link may exist between the onset of puberty and the early stages
United Kingdom, an average of six children per year are diagnosed, mainly males in early stages of puberty.  Due to the prevalence of diagnosis during teenage years, a link may exist between the onset of puberty and the early stages of this disease, although no research confirms
mainly males in early stages of puberty.  Due to the prevalence of diagnosis during teenage years, a link may exist between the onset of puberty and the early stages of this disease, although no research confirms this hypothesis.A grouping of three unrelated teenagers in Wake Forest,
is the second most common bone cancer in children and adolescents, with poor prognosis and outcome in ~70% of initial diagnoses and 10–15% of relapses.

will need to be diagnosed by biopsy. Treatment may include, surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and targeted drug therapy. The other type of sarcoma is a bone sarcoma. There are many types. The World Health Organization lists more than fifty subtypes.An earlier version of this
who are exposed to chlorophenols in wood preservatives and phenoxy herbicides may have an increased risk of developing soft-tissue sarcomas. An unusual percentage of patients with a rare blood vessel tumor, angiosarcoma of the liver, have been exposed to vinyl chloride in their work. This substance is
. This substance is used in the manufacture of certain plastics, notably PVC.In the early 1900s, when scientists were just discovering the potential uses of radiation to treat disease, little was known about safe dosage levels and precise methods of delivery. At that time, radiation was used to
1900s, when scientists were just discovering the potential uses of radiation to treat disease, little was known about safe dosage levels and precise methods of delivery. At that time, radiation was used to treat a variety of noncancerous medical problems, including enlargement of the tonsils, adenoids,
a variety of noncancerous medical problems, including enlargement of the tonsils, adenoids, and thymus gland. Later, researchers found that high doses of radiation caused soft-tissue sarcomas in some patients. Because of this risk, radiation treatment for cancer is now planned to ensure that the
soft-tissue sarcomas in some patients. Because of this risk, radiation treatment for cancer is now planned to ensure that the maximum dosage of radiation is delivered to diseased tissue while surrounding healthy tissue is protected as much as possible.Kaposi's sarcoma, a rare cancer of the
. Kaposi's sarcoma, however, has different characteristics than typical soft-tissue sarcomas and is treated differently.In a very small fraction of cases, sarcoma may be related to a rare inherited genetic alteration of the p53 gene and is known as Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Certain
The only reliable way to determine whether a soft-tissue tumour is benign or malignant is through a biopsy. The two methods for acquisition of tumour tissue for cytopathological analysis are:Needle aspiration biopsy, via  needleSurgically, via an incision made into the tumourA pathologist examines the tissue
an incision made into the tumourA pathologist examines the tissue under a microscope. If cancer is present, the pathologist can usually determine the type of cancer and its grade. Here, 'grade' refers to a scale used to represent concisely the predicted growth rate of the tumour and
doxorubicin chemotherapy as an adjuvant can reduce recurrence at the original site or elsewhere in the body. Evidence also suggests chemotherapy can increase the length of time patients live, but this is less certain evidence. The use of chemotherapy to prevent the spread of soft-tissue sarcomas has not
in the body. Evidence also suggests chemotherapy can increase the length of time patients live, but this is less certain evidence. The use of chemotherapy to prevent the spread of soft-tissue sarcomas has not been proven to be effective. If the cancer has spread to other areas
docetaxel and gemcitabine could be an effective chemotherapy regimen in patients with advanced soft-tissue sarcoma.The research in soft tissue sarcoma requires lot of effort because of its rarity and needs immense collaboration. In year 2019, few notable researches have been presented but mostly failed. However,
pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma. In a report by Dr. Sameer Rastogi et al, a patient with advanced pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma had excellent response to combination of pembrolizumab and pazopanib.Soft-tissue sarcomas are relatively uncommon cancers. They account for less than 1% of all new cancer cases each

a normal pregnancy, and produces chorionic gonadotropin, a hormone which is measured to monitor fetal well-being.While GTD overwhelmingly affects women of child-bearing age, it may rarely occur in postmenopausal women.GTD is the common name for five closely related tumours (one benign
egg into the uterine wall. But in GTD, they develop into tumour cells.Two main risk factors increase the likelihood for the development of GTD: 1) The woman being under 20 years of age, or over 35 years of age, and 2) previous GTD.Although molar
develop into tumour cells.Two main risk factors increase the likelihood for the development of GTD: 1) The woman being under 20 years of age, or over 35 years of age, and 2) previous GTD.Although molar pregnancies affect women of all ages, women under 16 and
risk factors increase the likelihood for the development of GTD: 1) The woman being under 20 years of age, or over 35 years of age, and 2) previous GTD.Although molar pregnancies affect women of all ages, women under 16 and over 45 years of age have an
over 35 years of age, and 2) previous GTD.Although molar pregnancies affect women of all ages, women under 16 and over 45 years of age have an increased risk of developing a molar pregnancy.Being from Asia/of Asian ethnicity is an important risk factor.Hydatidiform moles
most common cause of elevated serum hCG, clinicians generally first suspect a pregnancy with a complication. However, in GTD, the beta subunit of hCG (beta hCG) is also always elevated. Therefore, if GTD is clinically suspected, serum beta hCG is also measured.The
, serum beta hCG is also measured.The initial clinical diagnosis of GTD should be confirmed histologically, which can be done after the evacuation of pregnancy (see «Treatment» below) in women with hydatidiform mole. However, malignant GTD is highly vascular. If malignant GTD is
after any pregnancy, should also undergo hCG testing, because these may be signs of a hitherto undiagnosed GTD.There might be some signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism as well as an increase in the levels of thyroid hormones in some patients. The proposed mechanism is attaching hCG to TSH receptors and
because these may be signs of a hitherto undiagnosed GTD.There might be some signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism as well as an increase in the levels of thyroid hormones in some patients. The proposed mechanism is attaching hCG to TSH receptors and acting like TSH weakly.https://www.thyroid.org/patient-thyroid-information/ct-for-patients/vol-4-issue-9/vol-4-issue-9-p-5/</ref>These are not GTD, and they
, but their morphological features and clinical presentation can differ significantly.Exaggerated placental site is a benign, non cancerous lesion with an increased number of implantation site intermediate trophoblastic cells that infiltrate the endometrium and the underlying myometrium. An exaggerated placental site may occur with normal pregnancy, or after
surgical procedure. No specific treatment or follow up is necessary.Treatment is always necessary.The treatment for hydatidiform mole consists of the evacuation of pregnancy. Evacuation will lead to the relief of symptoms, and also prevent later complications. Suction curettage is the preferred method of evacuation.
is necessary.Treatment is always necessary.The treatment for hydatidiform mole consists of the evacuation of pregnancy. Evacuation will lead to the relief of symptoms, and also prevent later complications. Suction curettage is the preferred method of evacuation. Hysterectomy is an alternative if no further pregnancies are
the evacuation of pregnancy. Evacuation will lead to the relief of symptoms, and also prevent later complications. Suction curettage is the preferred method of evacuation. Hysterectomy is an alternative if no further pregnancies are wished for by the female patient. Hydatidiform mole also has successfully been treated with
to places where the cancer has spread, e.g. the brain.Women who undergo chemotherapy are advised not to conceive for one year after completion of treatment. These women also are likely to have an earlier menopause. It has been estimated by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists that
presence of GTD.In women who have a malignant form of GTD, hCG concentrations stay the same (plateau) or they rise. Persistent elevation of serum hCG levels after a non molar pregnancy (i.e., normal pregnancy [term pregnancy], or preterm pregnancy, or ectopic pregnancy [
early stages, but fertility may be lost. Hysterectomy (surgical removal of the uterus) can also be offered to patients > 40 years of age or those for whom sterilisation is not an obstacle. Only a few women with GTD have a poor prognosis, e.g. some forms of
of age or those for whom sterilisation is not an obstacle. Only a few women with GTD have a poor prognosis, e.g. some forms of stage IV GTN. The FIGO staging system is used. The risk can be estimated by scoring systems such as the Modified WHO Prognostic Scoring
Centre. There are efforts in this direction in the developing countries too, and there have been improvements in these countries in the early detection of choriocarcinoma, thereby significantly reducing the mortality rate also in  developing countries.Most women with GTD can become pregnant again and can have children
with GTD can become pregnant again and can have children again. The risk of a further molar pregnancy is low. More than 98% of women who become pregnant following a molar pregnancy will not have a further hydatidiform mole or be at increased risk of complications.In the past
. More than 98% of women who become pregnant following a molar pregnancy will not have a further hydatidiform mole or be at increased risk of complications.In the past, it was seen as important not to get pregnant straight away after a GTD. Specialists recommended a waiting period
into a tumour. Although PTD can spread within the body like a malignant cancer, the overall cure rate is nearly 100%.In the vast majority of patients, treatment of PTD consist of chemotherapy. Only about 10% of patients with PTD can be treated successfully with a second curettage.
cancer, the overall cure rate is nearly 100%.In the vast majority of patients, treatment of PTD consist of chemotherapy. Only about 10% of patients with PTD can be treated successfully with a second curettage.In some very rare cases, a GTD can coexist with a normal fetus
if the mother wishes, following appropriate counselling. The probability of achieving a healthy baby is approximately 40%, but there is a risk of complications, e.g. pulmonary embolism and pre-eclampsia. Compared with women who simply had a GTD in the past, there is no increased
difficult, because one would need to know all gestational events in the total population. Yet, it seems very likely that the estimated number of births that occur at home or outside of a hospital has been inflated in some reports.Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD) may also be
GTT).Hydatidiform mole (one type of GTD) may also be called molar pregnancy.Persistent disease; persistent GTD: If there is any evidence of persistence of GTD, usually defined as persistent elevation of beta hCG (see «Diagnosis» below), the condition may also be referred
(one type of GTD) may also be called molar pregnancy.Persistent disease; persistent GTD: If there is any evidence of persistence of GTD, usually defined as persistent elevation of beta hCG (see «Diagnosis» below), the condition may also be referred to as
be called molar pregnancy.Persistent disease; persistent GTD: If there is any evidence of persistence of GTD, usually defined as persistent elevation of beta hCG (see «Diagnosis» below), the condition may also be referred to as gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN).Trophoblastic neoplasms

pain. Fever, weight loss, and tiredness may also occur. Complications can include spread to the lungs or brain.The main types of kidney cancer are renal cell cancer (RCC), transitional cell cancer (TCC), and Wilms tumor. RCC makes up approximately 80
cancer are renal cell cancer (RCC), transitional cell cancer (TCC), and Wilms tumor. RCC makes up approximately 80% of kidney cancers, and TCC accounts for most of the rest. Risk factors for RCC and TCC include smoking, certain pain medications, previous
, liver dysfunction, milky nipple discharge unrelated normal breast-feeding (galactorrhea), and cushings syndrome. Non-endocrine dysfunctions include deposition of protein in tissue (amyloidosis), decrease in hemoglobin or red blood cells (anemia), disorders of nerves, muscles (neuromyopathies)
Non-endocrine dysfunctions include deposition of protein in tissue (amyloidosis), decrease in hemoglobin or red blood cells (anemia), disorders of nerves, muscles (neuromyopathies), blood vessels (vasculopathy) and blood clotting mechanisms (coagulopathy).Factors that increase the risk of kidney cancer include
), disorders of nerves, muscles (neuromyopathies), blood vessels (vasculopathy) and blood clotting mechanisms (coagulopathy).Factors that increase the risk of kidney cancer include smoking, high blood pressure, obesity, faulty genes, a family history of kidney cancer, having kidney disease that needs
clotting mechanisms (coagulopathy).Factors that increase the risk of kidney cancer include smoking, high blood pressure, obesity, faulty genes, a family history of kidney cancer, having kidney disease that needs dialysis, being infected with hepatitis C, and previous treatment for testicular cancer or cervical cancer.
testicular cancer or cervical cancer.There are also other possible risk factors such as kidney stones being investigated. Some studies have linked regular use of NSAIDs such as ibuprofen and naproxen to increases of kidney cancer risk by up to 51%.About 25-30% of the kidney cancer are attributed
other possible risk factors such as kidney stones being investigated. Some studies have linked regular use of NSAIDs such as ibuprofen and naproxen to increases of kidney cancer risk by up to 51%.About 25-30% of the kidney cancer are attributed to smoking. Smokers have a 1.3 times higher
have a 1.3 times higher risk of developing kidney cancer compared to non-smokers. Moreover, there is a dose-dependent increased risk of cancer development. Men who smoke more than 20 cigarettes per day have twice the risk. Likewise, women who smoke more than 20 cigarettes
than 20 cigarettes per day have twice the risk. Likewise, women who smoke more than 20 cigarettes per day have 1.5 times the risk of non-smokers. After 10 years of smoking cessation a substantial reduction is seen in the risk of developing kidney cancer.Due to the
risk. Likewise, women who smoke more than 20 cigarettes per day have 1.5 times the risk of non-smokers. After 10 years of smoking cessation a substantial reduction is seen in the risk of developing kidney cancer.Due to the increase in ultrasound and CT imaging for nonspecific
abdominal complaints, kidney masses are frequently incidentally diagnosed on medical imaging. More than 60% of renal cell carcinoma (the most common type of kidney cancer), are diagnosed incidentally by abdominal imaging for nonspecific abdominal complaints.Since there is a large differential diagnosis for a kidney tumor
and without IV contrast is the ideal imaging to diagnose and stage kidney cancer. There is tentative evidence that iodinated contrast agents may cause worsening of kidney function in people with chronic kidney disease (CKD) with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) less than 45ml/min/1.73m2 and should
are the most common organ for kidney cancer to spread to, a chest X-ray or CT scan may be ordered based on the person's risk for metastatic disease.Kidney masses can be classified by the nature of the cells in the growth, or by its appearance on radiography
the most common organ for kidney cancer to spread to, a chest X-ray or CT scan may be ordered based on the person's risk for metastatic disease.Kidney masses can be classified by the nature of the cells in the growth, or by its appearance on radiography
tissue (benign), inflammatory (a reaction of the immune system), or vascular (cells of the blood vessels).The most common type of kidney malignancy is renal cell carcinoma, which is thought to originate from cells in the proximal convoluted tubule of the nephron. Another type of
of kidney malignancy is renal cell carcinoma, which is thought to originate from cells in the proximal convoluted tubule of the nephron. Another type of kidney cancer although less common, is transitional cell cancer (TCC) or urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis. The renal pelvis is the
are called transitional cells, and are also sometimes called urothelial cells. The transitional/urothelial cells in the renal pelvis are the same type of cells that line the ureter and bladder. For this reason TCC of the renal pelvis is distinct from RCC and is thought to behave more
. For this reason TCC of the renal pelvis is distinct from RCC and is thought to behave more like bladder cancer. Other rare types of kidney cancers that can arise from the urothelial cells of the renal pelvis are squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.Other causes of kidney cancer include
Other rare types of kidney cancers that can arise from the urothelial cells of the renal pelvis are squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.Other causes of kidney cancer include the following:Sarcoma- for example leiomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, angiosarcoma, clear-cell sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma are types of sarcomas that
Other causes of kidney cancer include the following:Sarcoma- for example leiomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, angiosarcoma, clear-cell sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma are types of sarcomas that have occurred in the kidneyMetastatic tumor from distant organLymphomaWilms tumor- an embryonic tumor that is the most common type of kidney cancer in childrenCarcinoid
and rhabdomyosarcoma are types of sarcomas that have occurred in the kidneyMetastatic tumor from distant organLymphomaWilms tumor- an embryonic tumor that is the most common type of kidney cancer in childrenCarcinoid tumor of the renal pelvisCarcinosarcomaInverted urothelial papilloma- was traditionally regarded as a benign growth. However, there may be an increased
benign growth. However, there may be an increased risk for recurrence and transformation to TCC.In children, Wilms tumor is the most common type of kidney cancer. Mesoblastic nephroma, although rare, also typically presents in childhood.Renal cell carcinoma has been further divided into sub-types
mass biopsy should be considered if there is a high likelihood that the mass is hematologic, metastatic, inflammatory, or infectious. These types of lesions would not be managed surgically, differing from cancer originating from the kidney. Cancer originating outside the kidney and lymphoma are managed systemically.
a 99.8% chance that kidney cancer is present (Positive Predictive Value= 99.8%). A negative biopsy does not rule out a diagnosis of cancer.Staging is the process that helps determine the extent and spread of the disease. Renal cell carcinoma is the only type of kidney
diagnosis of cancer.Staging is the process that helps determine the extent and spread of the disease. Renal cell carcinoma is the only type of kidney cancer that can be staged. The first step of staging follows the TNM staging system proposed by the Union International Contre le Cancer that
the extent and spread of the disease. Renal cell carcinoma is the only type of kidney cancer that can be staged. The first step of staging follows the TNM staging system proposed by the Union International Contre le Cancer that is widely used among cancers in other organs. The TNM
treatments for kidney cancer.Other treatment options include biological therapies such as everolimus, torisel, nexavar, sutent, and axitinib, the use of immunotherapy including interferon and interleukin-2. Immunotherapy is successful in 10 to 15% of people. Sunitinib is the current standard of care in the
torisel, nexavar, sutent, and axitinib, the use of immunotherapy including interferon and interleukin-2. Immunotherapy is successful in 10 to 15% of people. Sunitinib is the current standard of care in the adjuvant setting along with pazopanib; these treatments are often followed by everolimus, axitinib
, the use of immunotherapy including interferon and interleukin-2. Immunotherapy is successful in 10 to 15% of people. Sunitinib is the current standard of care in the adjuvant setting along with pazopanib; these treatments are often followed by everolimus, axitinib, and sorafenib. Immune checkpoint inhibitors are
tumor, chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery are the accepted treatments, depending on the stage of the disease when it is diagnosed.The majority of kidney cancers reported in children are Wilms' tumors. These tumors can begin to grow when a fetus is still developing in the uterus,
what causes most Wilms' tumors. The most common symptoms are swelling of the abdomen and blood in the urine.Around 208,500 new cases of kidney cancer are diagnosed in the world each year, accounting for just under 2% of all cancers. The highest rates are recorded in
are recorded in North America and the lowest rates in Asia and Africa.The United States' NIH estimates for 2013 around 64,770 new cases of kidney cancer and 13,570 deaths from the disease.The incidence of kidney cancer is also increasing in the United States. This is thought to
Africa.The United States' NIH estimates for 2013 around 64,770 new cases of kidney cancer and 13,570 deaths from the disease.The incidence of kidney cancer is also increasing in the United States. This is thought to be a real increase, not only due to changes in the
This is thought to be a real increase, not only due to changes in the way the disease is diagnosed.The most recent estimates of incidence of kidney cancer suggest that there are 63,300 new cases annually in the EU25. In Europe, kidney cancer accounts for nearly 3%
thought to be a real increase, not only due to changes in the way the disease is diagnosed.The most recent estimates of incidence of kidney cancer suggest that there are 63,300 new cases annually in the EU25. In Europe, kidney cancer accounts for nearly 3% of all
common cancer in the UK (around 10,100 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and it is the fourteenth most common cause of cancer death (around 4,300 people died in 2012).
tumors along with genes and proteins causative in different phenotypes. Radiotherapy for unrelated conditions may be a rare cause.Familial cases where the deletion of chromosome 13q14 inactivates the retinoblastoma gene is associated with a high risk of osteosarcoma development.Bone dysplasias, including Paget's disease of bone,
unrelated conditions may be a rare cause.Familial cases where the deletion of chromosome 13q14 inactivates the retinoblastoma gene is associated with a high risk of osteosarcoma development.Bone dysplasias, including Paget's disease of bone, fibrous dysplasia, enchondromatosis, and hereditary multiple exostoses, increase the risk
the deletion of chromosome 13q14 inactivates the retinoblastoma gene is associated with a high risk of osteosarcoma development.Bone dysplasias, including Paget's disease of bone, fibrous dysplasia, enchondromatosis, and hereditary multiple exostoses, increase the risk of osteosarcoma.Li–Fraumeni syndrome (germline TP53 mutation
osteosarcoma development.Bone dysplasias, including Paget's disease of bone, fibrous dysplasia, enchondromatosis, and hereditary multiple exostoses, increase the risk of osteosarcoma.Li–Fraumeni syndrome (germline TP53 mutation) is a predisposing factor for osteosarcoma development.Rothmund–Thomson syndrome (i.e. autosomal
hypogonadism, and cataracts) is associated with increased risk of this disease.Large doses of Sr-90, nicknamed bone seeker, increases the risk of bone cancer and leukemia in animals and is presumed to do so in people.There is no clear association between water fluoridation and cancer or
between water fluoridation and cancer or deaths due to cancer, both for cancer in general and also specifically for bone cancer and osteosarcoma. Series of research concluded that concentration of fluoride in water doesn't associate with osteosarcoma. The beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a
or deaths due to cancer, both for cancer in general and also specifically for bone cancer and osteosarcoma. Series of research concluded that concentration of fluoride in water doesn't associate with osteosarcoma. The beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a study of US National Toxicology
for bone cancer and osteosarcoma. Series of research concluded that concentration of fluoride in water doesn't associate with osteosarcoma. The beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a study of US National Toxicology program in 1990, which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma
. The beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a study of US National Toxicology program in 1990, which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice.
beliefs regarding association of fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma stem from a study of US National Toxicology program in 1990, which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice. Fluoridation of
Toxicology program in 1990, which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice. Fluoridation of water has been practiced around the world to improve citizens' dental health. It
which showed uncertain evidence of association of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice. Fluoridation of water has been practiced around the world to improve citizens' dental health. It is also deemed as major
of fluoride and osteosarcoma in male rats. But there is still no solid evidence of cancer-causing tendency of fluoride in mice. Fluoridation of water has been practiced around the world to improve citizens' dental health. It is also deemed as major health success. Fluoride concentration levels
new bone formation.  Yet, further research shows no osteosarcoma risks from fluoridated water in humans. Most of the research involved counting number of osteosarcoma patients cases in particular areas which has difference concentrations of fluoride in drinking water. The statistic analysis of the data shows no significant difference
osteosarcoma risks from fluoridated water in humans. Most of the research involved counting number of osteosarcoma patients cases in particular areas which has difference concentrations of fluoride in drinking water. The statistic analysis of the data shows no significant difference in occurrences of osteosarcoma cases in different fluoridated regions. Another
cases in particular areas which has difference concentrations of fluoride in drinking water. The statistic analysis of the data shows no significant difference in occurrences of osteosarcoma cases in different fluoridated regions. Another important research involved collecting bone samples from osteosarcoma patients to measure fluoride concentration and compare them to bone
fluoride concentration and compare them to bone samples of newly diagnosed malignant bone tumors. The result is that the median fluoride concentrations in bone samples of osteosarcoma patients and tumor controls are not significantly different. Not only fluoride concentration in bones, Fluoride exposures of osteosarcoma patients are also proven to
median fluoride concentrations in bone samples of osteosarcoma patients and tumor controls are not significantly different. Not only fluoride concentration in bones, Fluoride exposures of osteosarcoma patients are also proven to be not significantly different from healthy people.Osteosarcomas tend to occur at the sites of bone growth, presumably
bones, Fluoride exposures of osteosarcoma patients are also proven to be not significantly different from healthy people.Osteosarcomas tend to occur at the sites of bone growth, presumably because proliferation makes osteoblastic cells in this region prone to acquire mutations that could lead to transformation of cells (the RB
occur at the sites of bone growth, presumably because proliferation makes osteoblastic cells in this region prone to acquire mutations that could lead to transformation of cells (the RB gene and p53 gene are commonly involved). Due to this tendency, high incidence of osteosarcoma is seen in some
that could lead to transformation of cells (the RB gene and p53 gene are commonly involved). Due to this tendency, high incidence of osteosarcoma is seen in some large dog breeds (St. Bernards and Great Danes). The tumor may be localized at the end of the
The tumor may be localized at the end of the long bone (commonly in the metaphysis). Most often it affects the proximal end of tibia or humerus, or distal end of femur. Osteosarcoma tends to affect regions around the knee in 60% of cases, 15%
of the long bone (commonly in the metaphysis). Most often it affects the proximal end of tibia or humerus, or distal end of femur. Osteosarcoma tends to affect regions around the knee in 60% of cases, 15% around the hip, 10% at the
affects the proximal end of tibia or humerus, or distal end of femur. Osteosarcoma tends to affect regions around the knee in 60% of cases, 15% around the hip, 10% at the shoulder, and 8% in the jaw. The tumor is solid,
is known as a Codman triangle, which is characteristic but not diagnostic of osteosarcoma. Surrounding tissues are infiltrated.Microscopically: The characteristic feature of osteosarcoma is presence of osteoid (bone formation) within the tumor. Tumor cells are very pleomorphic (anaplastic), some are giant,
Codman triangle, which is characteristic but not diagnostic of osteosarcoma. Surrounding tissues are infiltrated.Microscopically: The characteristic feature of osteosarcoma is presence of osteoid (bone formation) within the tumor. Tumor cells are very pleomorphic (anaplastic), some are giant, numerous atypical mitoses.
tumor (most bone tumors are benign). The route to osteosarcoma diagnosis usually begins with an X-ray, continues with a combination of scans (CT scan, PET scan, bone scan, MRI) and ends with a surgical biopsy. A characteristic often seen in an
suggestive, but bone biopsy is the only definitive method to determine whether a tumor is malignant or benign.Most times, the early signs of osteosarcoma are caught on X-rays taken during routine dental check-ups. Osteosarcoma frequently develops in the mandible (lower jaw);
grade central OSPeriosteal OSParaosteal OSSecondary OSHigh-grade surface OSExtraskeletal OSA complete radical, surgical, en bloc resection of the cancer, is the treatment of choice in osteosarcoma. Although about 90% of patients are able to have limb-salvage surgery, complications, particularly infection, prosthetic loosening
OSExtraskeletal OSA complete radical, surgical, en bloc resection of the cancer, is the treatment of choice in osteosarcoma. Although about 90% of patients are able to have limb-salvage surgery, complications, particularly infection, prosthetic loosening and non-union, or local tumor recurrence
Mifamurtide is used after a patient has had surgery to remove the tumor and together with chemotherapy to kill remaining cancer cells to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. Also, the option to have rotationplasty after the tumor is taken out exists.Patients with osteosarcoma are best managed by a
experienced in managing sarcomas. Current standard treatment is to use neoadjuvant chemotherapy (chemotherapy given before surgery) followed by surgical resection. The percentage of tumor cell necrosis (cell death) seen in the tumor after surgery gives an idea of the prognosis and also lets the oncologist know if
an idea of the prognosis and also lets the oncologist know if the chemotherapy regimen should be altered after surgery.Standard therapy is a combination of limb-salvage orthopedic surgery when possible (or amputation in some cases) and a combination of high-dose methotrexate with leucovorin rescue,
muramyl tripeptide. Rotationplasty may be used. Ifosfamide can be used as an adjuvant treatment if the necrosis rate is low.Despite the success of chemotherapy for osteosarcoma, it has one of the lowest survival rates for pediatric cancer. The best reported 10-year survival rate is 92
or pegfilgrastim help with white blood cell counts and neutrophil counts. Blood transfusions and epoetin alfa help with anemia. Computational analysis on a panel of osteosarcoma cell lines identified new shared and specific therapeutic targets (proteomic and genetic) in osteosarcoma, while phenotypes showed an increased role of tumor
panel of osteosarcoma cell lines identified new shared and specific therapeutic targets (proteomic and genetic) in osteosarcoma, while phenotypes showed an increased role of tumor microenvironments.Prognosis is separated into three groups.Stage I osteosarcoma is rare and includes parosteal osteosarcoma or low-grade central osteosarcoma.
the site of the tumor (proximal tibia, femur, pelvis, etc.), size of the tumor mass, and the degree of necrosis from neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Other pathological factors such as the degree of p-glycoprotein, whether the tumor is cxcr4-positive, or
etc.), size of the tumor mass, and the degree of necrosis from neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Other pathological factors such as the degree of p-glycoprotein, whether the tumor is cxcr4-positive, or Her2-positive are also important, as these are associated with distant
The prognosis for patients with metastatic osteosarcoma improves with longer times to metastases (more than 12 months to 4 months), a smaller number of metastases, and their resectability.  It is better to have fewer metastases than longer time to metastases.  Those with a longer length
metastases, and their resectability.  It is better to have fewer metastases than longer time to metastases.  Those with a longer length of time (more than 24 months) and few nodules (two or fewer) have the best prognosis, with a two-year survival
%, and 10-year of 20%.  If metastases are both local and regional, the prognosis is worse.Initial presentation of stage III osteosarcoma with lung metastases depends on the resectability of the primary tumor and lung nodules, degree of necrosis of the primary tumor,
prognosis is worse.Initial presentation of stage III osteosarcoma with lung metastases depends on the resectability of the primary tumor and lung nodules, degree of necrosis of the primary tumor, and maybe the number of metastases.  Overall survival prognosis is about 30%.Deaths due to malignant neoplasms of the
lung metastases depends on the resectability of the primary tumor and lung nodules, degree of necrosis of the primary tumor, and maybe the number of metastases.  Overall survival prognosis is about 30%.Deaths due to malignant neoplasms of the bones and joints account for an unknown number of childhood cancer
the number of metastases.  Overall survival prognosis is about 30%.Deaths due to malignant neoplasms of the bones and joints account for an unknown number of childhood cancer deaths. Mortality rates due to osteosarcoma have been declining at about 1.3% per year. Long-term survival probabilities for osteosarcoma
term survival probabilities for osteosarcoma have improved dramatically during the late 20th century and approximated 68% in 2009.Osteosarcoma is the eighth-most common form of childhood cancer, comprising 2.4% of all malignancies in pediatric patients, and about 20% of all primary bone cancers.Incidence rates for
all malignancies in pediatric patients, and about 20% of all primary bone cancers.Incidence rates for osteosarcoma in U.S. patients under 20 years of age are estimated at 5.0 per million per year in the general population, with a slight variation between individuals of black, Hispanic, and
each year.  A second peak in incidence occurs in the elderly, usually associated with an underlying bone pathology such as Paget's disease of bone.Osteosarcoma is the most common bone tumor in dogs and typically afflicts middle-aged large and giant breed dogs such as Irish Wolfhounds
, the mandible, the spine, and the pelvis.  Rarely, osteosarcoma may arise from soft tissues (extraskeletal osteosarcoma). Metastasis of tumors involving the limb bones is very common, usually to the lungs. The tumor causes a great deal of pain, and can even
extraskeletal osteosarcoma). Metastasis of tumors involving the limb bones is very common, usually to the lungs. The tumor causes a great deal of pain, and can even lead to fracture of the affected bone. As with human osteosarcoma, bone biopsy is the definitive method to reach
lesions, such as osteomyelitis. Differential diagnosis of the osteosarcoma of the skull in particular includes, among others, chondrosarcoma and the multilobular tumour of bone.Amputation is the initial treatment, although this alone will not prevent metastasis. Chemotherapy combined with amputation improves the survival time, but
procedures) do not improve the prognosis.Some current studies indicate osteoclast inhibitors such as alendronate and pamidronate may have beneficial effects on the quality of life by reducing osteolysis, thus reducing the degree of pain, as well as the risk of pathological fractures.Osteosarcoma is also the most
studies indicate osteoclast inhibitors such as alendronate and pamidronate may have beneficial effects on the quality of life by reducing osteolysis, thus reducing the degree of pain, as well as the risk of pathological fractures.Osteosarcoma is also the most common bone tumor in cats, although not as frequently
is a subtype and one of the most aggressive of the diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. PCNSLs represent around 20% of all cases of lymphomas in HIV infections. (Other types are Burkitt's lymphomas and immunoblastic lymphomas). Primary CNS lymphoma is highly associated with Epstein-
those with AIDS and those immunosuppressed), and does not have a predilection for any particular age group. Mean CD4+ count at time of diagnosis is ~50/uL.  In immunocompromised patients, prognosis is usually poor.  In immunocompetent patients (that is, patients who do
of the depth of the tumour. Treatment with irradiation and corticosteroids often only produces a partial response and tumour recurs in more than 90% of patients. Median survival is 10 to 18 months in immunocompetent patients, and less in those with AIDS. The addition of IV methotrexate and
, median survival time may increase beyond 4 years.  However, radiation is not recommended in conjunction with methotrexate because of an increased risk of leukoencephalopathy and dementia in patients older than 60.  In AIDS patients, perhaps the most important factor with respect to treatment is the use
to treatment is the use of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART), which affects the CD4+ lymphocyte population and the level of immunosuppression. The optimal treatment plan for patients with PCNSL has not been determined. Combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy at least doubles survival time, but
PCNSL has not been determined. Combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy at least doubles survival time, but causes dementia and leukoencephalopathy in at least 50% of patients who undergo it. The most studied chemotherapeutic agent in PCNSL is methotrexate (a folate analogue that interferes with DNA repair). Methotrexate
the responses were complete.The initial response to radiotherapy is often excellent, and may result in a complete remission. However, the duration of response with radiotherapy alone remains short, with median survival after treatment with radiotherapy just 18 months. Methotrexate based chemotherapy markedly improves survival, with
from Greek: νεῦρον (neûron), "string, nerve" and the suffix -logia, "study of") is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the nervous system. Neurology deals with the diagnosis and treatment of all categories of conditions and disease involving the central
of") is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the nervous system. Neurology deals with the diagnosis and treatment of all categories of conditions and disease involving the central and peripheral nervous systems (and their subdivisions, the autonomic and  somatic nervous systems), including their
systems), including their coverings, blood vessels, and all effector tissue, such as muscle. Neurological practice relies heavily on the field of neuroscience, the scientific study of the nervous system. A neurologist is a physician specializing in neurology and trained to investigate, or diagnose and
and basic or translational research. While neurology is a nonsurgical specialty, its corresponding surgical specialty is neurosurgery.Significant overlap occurs between the fields of neurology and psychiatry, with the boundary between the two disciplines and the conditions they treat being somewhat nebulous.Many neurological disorders have been described
, William A. Hammond, Jean-Martin Charcot, and John Hughlings Jackson. Many neurologists also have additional training or interest in one area of neurology, such as stroke, epilepsy, neuromuscular, sleep medicine, pain management, or movement disorders.In the United States and Canada
, which includes obtaining a four-year undergraduate degree, a medical degree (DO or MD), which comprises an additional four years of study, then completing one year of basic clinical training and four years of residency. The four-year residency consists of one year of
(DO or MD), which comprises an additional four years of study, then completing one year of basic clinical training and four years of residency. The four-year residency consists of one year of internal medicine internship training followed by three years of training in neurology.Some
clinical training and four years of residency. The four-year residency consists of one year of internal medicine internship training followed by three years of training in neurology.Some neurologists receive additional subspecialty training focusing on a particular area of the fields.  These training programs are called fellowships
neurology (stroke), behavioral neurology, child neurology, headache, multiple sclerosis, neuroimaging, neurorehabilitation.In Germany, a compulsory year of psychiatry must be done to complete a residency of neurology.In the United Kingdom and Ireland, neurology is a subspecialty of general (internal
neurology, headache, multiple sclerosis, neuroimaging, neurorehabilitation.In Germany, a compulsory year of psychiatry must be done to complete a residency of neurology.In the United Kingdom and Ireland, neurology is a subspecialty of general (internal) medicine. After five years of medical school
 However, that was uncommon and, now that the MRCPsych takes three years to obtain, would no longer be practical. A period of research is essential, and obtaining a higher degree aids career progression. Many found it was eased after an attachment to the Institute of Neurology
progression. Many found it was eased after an attachment to the Institute of Neurology at Queen Square, London. Some neurologists enter the field of rehabilitation medicine (known as physiatry in the US) to specialise in neurological rehabilitation, which may include stroke medicine, as well as brain
specialise in neurological rehabilitation, which may include stroke medicine, as well as brain injuries.During a neurological examination, the neurologist reviews the patient's health history with special attention to the current condition. The patient then takes a neurological exam. Typically, the exam tests mental status,
in neurological rehabilitation, which may include stroke medicine, as well as brain injuries.During a neurological examination, the neurologist reviews the patient's health history with special attention to the current condition. The patient then takes a neurological exam. Typically, the exam tests mental status,
disease and diagnosis of many other neurogenetic diseases.  The role of genetic influences on the development of acquired neurologic diseases is an active area of research.Some of the commonly encountered conditions treated by neurologists include headaches, radiculopathy, neuropathy, stroke, dementia, seizures and epilepsy,
procedure.Some neurologists specialize in certain parts of the nervous system or in specific procedures. For example, clinical neurophysiologists specialize in the use of EEG and intraoperative monitoring to diagnose certain neurological disorders. Other neurologists specialize in the use of electrodiagnostic medicine studies – needle EMG and NCSs.
and laboratory experiments and tests to learn more about the nervous system and find cures or new treatments for diseases and disorders.A great deal of overlap occurs between neuroscience and neurology. Many neurologists work in academic training hospitals, where they conduct research as neuroscientists in addition to treating patients
refer the patient to a neurosurgeon or an interventional neuroradiologist. In some countries, additional legal responsibilities of a neurologist may include making a finding of brain death when it is suspected that a patient has died. Neurologists frequently care for people with hereditary (genetic) diseases when the major
, varying from country to country and even within a local geographic area. Acute head trauma is most often treated by neurosurgeons, whereas sequelae of head trauma may be treated by neurologists or specialists in rehabilitation medicine. Although stroke cases have been traditionally managed by internal medicine or hospitalists,
vascular neurology and interventional neuroradiology has created a demand for stroke specialists. The establishment of Joint Commission-certified stroke centers has increased the role of neurologists in stroke care in many primary, as well as tertiary, hospitals. Some cases of nervous system infectious diseases are treated by infectious
many primary, as well as tertiary, hospitals. Some cases of nervous system infectious diseases are treated by infectious disease specialists. Most cases of headache are diagnosed and treated primarily by general practitioners, at least the less severe cases. Likewise, most cases of sciatica are treated by
specialists. Most cases of headache are diagnosed and treated primarily by general practitioners, at least the less severe cases. Likewise, most cases of sciatica are treated by general practitioners, though they may be referred to neurologists or  surgeons (neurosurgeons or orthopedic surgeons). Sleep disorders
that in and of themselves serve as reliable or predictive biomarkers of a given mental disorder.The emerging field of neurological enhancement highlights the potential of therapies to improve such things as workplace efficacy, attention in school, and overall happiness in personal lives. However, this field has also
attention in school, and overall happiness in personal lives. However, this field has also given rise to questions about neuroethics and the psychopharmacology of lifestyle drugs can have negative and positive effects on neurology because different types of drugs can depend on people and their lives [Cheyanne l.dorsey]
field has also given rise to questions about neuroethics and the psychopharmacology of lifestyle drugs can have negative and positive effects on neurology because different types of drugs can depend on people and their lives [Cheyanne l.dorsey]
no way of determining which lesions will remain stable without treatment, and which will go on to become invasive. DCIS encompasses a wide spectrum of diseases ranging from low-grade lesions that are not life-threatening to high-grade (i.e. potentially highly aggressive) lesions.DCIS
intermediate, and low grade), and the presence or absence of comedo histology. DCIS can be detected on mammograms by examining tiny specks of calcium known as microcalcifications. Since suspicious groups of microcalcifications can appear even in the absence of DCIS, a biopsy may be necessary for diagnosis
presence or absence of comedo histology. DCIS can be detected on mammograms by examining tiny specks of calcium known as microcalcifications. Since suspicious groups of microcalcifications can appear even in the absence of DCIS, a biopsy may be necessary for diagnosis.About 20–30% of those who do not
may be necessary for diagnosis.About 20–30% of those who do not receive treatment develop breast cancer. It is the most common type of pre-cancer in women. There is some disagreement on its status as a cancer; some bodies include DCIS when calculating breast cancer statistics
National Cancer Institute describes it as a "noninvasive condition".Most of the women who develop DCIS do not experience any symptoms. The majority of cases (80-85%) are detected through screening mammography. The first signs and symptoms may appear if the cancer advances. Because
cancer.Some women are however more prone than others to developing DCIS. Women considered at higher risks are those who have a family history of breast cancer, those who have had their periods at an early age or who have had a late menopause. Also, women who have
, women who have never had children or had them late in life are also more likely to get this condition.Long-term use of estrogen-progestin hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for more than five years after menopause, genetic mutations (BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes),
of the condition. Nonetheless, the risk of developing noninvasive cancer increases with age and it is higher in women older than 45 years.80% of cases in the United States are detected by mammography screening. More definitive diagnosis is made by breast biopsy for histopathology.There are different opinions
be used as hormonal therapy if the cells show estrogen receptor positivity. Chemotherapy is not needed for DCIS since the disease is noninvasive.Use of radiation therapy after lumpectomy provides equivalent survival rates to mastectomy, although there is a slightly higher risk of recurrent disease in the same breast in
the same breast in the form of further DCIS or invasive breast cancer. Systematic reviews (including a Cochrane review) indicate that the addition of radiation therapy to lumpectomy reduces recurrence of DCIS or later onset of invasive breast cancer in comparison with breast-conserving surgery alone, without affecting
exposure in healthy tissues. They do recommend that comprehensive information on potential side effects is given to women who receive this treatment. The addition of radiation therapy to lumpectomy appears to reduce the risk of local recurrence to approximately 12%, of which approximately half will be DCIS and half
risk of local recurrence to approximately 12%, of which approximately half will be DCIS and half will be invasive breast cancer; the risk of recurrence is 1% for women undergoing mastectomy.There is no evidence that mastectomy decreases the risk of death over a lumpectomy. Mastectomy;
be invasive breast cancer; the risk of recurrence is 1% for women undergoing mastectomy.There is no evidence that mastectomy decreases the risk of death over a lumpectomy. Mastectomy; however, may decrease the rate of the DCIS or invasive cancer occurring in the same location.Mastectomies
decrease the rate of the DCIS or invasive cancer occurring in the same location.Mastectomies remain a common recommendation in those with persistent microscopic involvement of margins after local excision or with a diagnosis of DCIS and evidence of suspicious, diffuse microcalcifications.Some institutions that have encountered high rates of
is excellent, with greater than 97% long-term survival. If untreated, DCIS progresses to invasive cancer in roughly one-third of cases, usually in the same breast and quadrant as the earlier DCIS. About 2% of women who are diagnosed with this condition and
to invasive cancer in roughly one-third of cases, usually in the same breast and quadrant as the earlier DCIS. About 2% of women who are diagnosed with this condition and treated died within 10 years. Biomarkers can identify which women who were initially diagnosed with DCIS are
20% of all breast cancers.Cases of DCIS have increased 5 fold between 1983 and 2003 in the United States due to the introduction of screening mammography. In 2009 about 62,000 cases were diagnosed.
Other symptoms may include difficult or painful swallowing, new lumps or bumps in the neck, a swelling in the mouth, or a feeling of numbness in the mouth or lips.Risk factors include tobacco and alcohol use. With both tobacco and drinking alcohol, the risk of oral
times greater. Other risk factors include HPV infection, chewing paan, and sun exposure on the lower lip. Oral cancer is a subgroup of head and neck cancers. Diagnosis is made by biopsy of the concerning area, followed by investigation with CT scan, MRI, PET scan
Oral cancer can be prevented by avoiding tobacco products, limiting alcohol use, sun protection on the lower lip, HPV vaccination, and avoidance of paan. Treatments used for oral cancer can include a combination of surgery (to remove the tumor and regional lymph nodes), radiation therapy
use, sun protection on the lower lip, HPV vaccination, and avoidance of paan. Treatments used for oral cancer can include a combination of surgery (to remove the tumor and regional lymph nodes), radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or targeted therapy.  The types of treatments
combination of surgery (to remove the tumor and regional lymph nodes), radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or targeted therapy.  The types of treatments will depend on the size, locations, and spread of the cancer taken into consideration with the general health of the person.In
commonly a mass. It can also be associated with a white patch, loose teeth, bleeding gums, persistent ear ache, a feeling of numbness in the lip and chin, or swelling.When the cancer extends to the throat, there can also be difficulty swallowing, painful
of which is tobacco. Like all environmental factors, the rate at which cancer will develop is dependent on the dose, frequency and method of application of the carcinogen (the substance that is causing the cancer). Aside from cigarette smoking, other carcinogens for oral cancer include alcohol
-containing mouthwashes as also being potential causes. The claim was that constant exposure to these alcohol-containing rinses, even in the absence of smoking and drinking, leads to significant increases in the development of oral cancer. However, studies conducted in 1985, 1995, and 2003
evidence does not support a connection between oral cancer and alcohol-containing mouthrinse". A 2008 study suggests that acetaldehyde (a breakdown product of alcohol) is implicated in oral cancer, but this study specifically focused on abusers of alcohol and made no reference to mouthwash.Infection with
A 2008 study suggests that acetaldehyde (a breakdown product of alcohol) is implicated in oral cancer, but this study specifically focused on abusers of alcohol and made no reference to mouthwash.Infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), particularly type 16 (there are over 180 types)
to 1, males over females 3 to 1, and 75% of the time people who have used tobacco products or are heavy users of alcohol. This new and rapidly growing subpopulation between 30 and 50 years old, is predominantly nonsmoking, white, and males slightly outnumber females
tobacco caused disease.Chewing betel, paan and Areca is known to be a strong risk factor for developing oral cancer even in the absence of tobacco. It increases the rate of oral cancer 2.1 times, through a variety of genetic and related effects through local irritation of the mucous
actinic cheilitis. In the Indian subcontinent oral submucous fibrosis is very common due to betel nut chewing. This condition is characterized by limited opening of mouth and burning sensation on eating of spicy food. This is a progressive lesion in which the opening of the mouth becomes progressively limited,
(2) staging, and (3) treatment planning. A complete history, and clinical examination is first completed, then a wedge of tissue is cut from the suspicious lesion for tissue diagnosis. This might be done with scalpel biopsy, punch biopsy, fine or core needle
structure. They may add additional information that can be used in staging, and treatment planning, such as the mitotic rate, the depth of invasion, and the HPV status of the tissue.After the tissue is confirmed cancerous, other tests will be completed to:better assess
the body (chest X-ray, nuclear medicine).Other, more invasive tests, may also be completed such as fine needle aspiration, biopsy of lymph nodes, and sentinel node biopsy. When the cancer has spread to lymph nodes, their exact location, size, and spread beyond
the lymph nodes) needs to be determined, as each can have a significant impact on treatment and prognosis. Small differences in the pattern of lymph node spread, can have a significant impact on treatment and prognosis. Panendoscopy may be recommended, because the tissues of the entire upper
removed to determine the prognosis, need for additional surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, immunotherapy, or other interventions.Oral cancer is a subgroup of head and neck cancers which includes those of the oropharynx, larynx, nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses,  salivary glands, and thyroid gland
those of the oropharynx, larynx, nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses,  salivary glands, and thyroid gland. Oral melanoma, while part of head and neck cancers is considered separately. Other cancers can occur in the mouth (such as bone cancer, lymphoma, or metastatic cancers
, or metastatic cancers from distant sites) but are also considered separately from oral cancers.Oral cancer staging is an assessment of the degree of spread of the cancer from its original source. It is one of the factors affecting both the prognosis and the potential treatment of oral cancer
to be classified into a prognostic staging group;The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) in 2013 stated evidence was insufficient to determine the balance of benefits and harms of screening for oral cancer in adults without symptoms by primary care providers. The American Academy of Family Physicians comes to similar
years who have periodic health examinations should have the oral cavity examined for cancer. The American Dental Association recommends that providers remain alert for signs of cancer during routine examinations.There are a variety of screening devices, however, there is no evidence that routine use of these devices in
cavity examined for cancer. The American Dental Association recommends that providers remain alert for signs of cancer during routine examinations.There are a variety of screening devices, however, there is no evidence that routine use of these devices in general dental practice is helpful. However, there are
evidence that routine use of these devices in general dental practice is helpful. However, there are compelling reasons to be concerned about the risk of harm this device may cause if routinely used in general practice. Such harms include false positives, unnecessary surgical biopsies and a financial burden.
surgery or radiation will cause severe limited mouth opening, part of the bone is also removed with the tumor. Management of the neck Spread of cancer from the oral cavity to the lymph nodes of the neck has a significant effect on survival. Between 60–70% of people with early
the neck Spread of cancer from the oral cavity to the lymph nodes of the neck has a significant effect on survival. Between 60–70% of people with early stage oral cancer will have no lymph node involvement of the neck clinically, but 20–30% of those people (or up
the neck clinically, but 20–30% of those people (or up to 20% of all those affected) will have clinically undetectable spread of cancer to the lymph nodes of the neck (called occult disease).The management of the neck is crucial, since spread to it reduces the chance
cancer to the lymph nodes of the neck (called occult disease).The management of the neck is crucial, since spread to it reduces the chance of survival by 50%. If there is evidence of lymph node involvement of the neck, during the diagnostic phase, then a modified radical
occult disease).The management of the neck is crucial, since spread to it reduces the chance of survival by 50%. If there is evidence of lymph node involvement of the neck, during the diagnostic phase, then a modified radical neck dissection is generally performed. Where the neck lymph
the neck, during the diagnostic phase, then a modified radical neck dissection is generally performed. Where the neck lymph nodes have no evidence of involvement clinically, but the oral cavity lesion is high risk for spread (e.g. T2 or above lesions), then a neck dissection of
pathologists may be involved at this stage. Treatment of oral cancer will usually be by a multidisciplinary team, with treatment professionals from the realms of radiation, surgery, chemotherapy, nutrition, dentistry, and even psychology all possibly involved with diagnosis, treatment, rehabilitation, and care.
oropharyngeal cancer. It is estimated that there were 61,400 cases of oral and lip cancer within Europe in 2012. Hungary recorded the highest number of mortality and morbidity due to oral and pharyngeal cancer among all European countries while Cyprus reported the lowest numbers  United Kingdom British Cancer Research found
Research found 2,386 deaths due to oral cancer in 2014; other studies show this is particularly within the elder population category; only 6% of people affected by oral cancer are under 45. The UK is 16th-lowest for males and 11th-highest for females for oral cancer
UK (around 6,800 people were diagnosed with oral cancer in the UK in 2011), and it is the nineteenth-most -common cause of cancer death (around 2,100 people died from the disease in 2012). Northern Europe The highest incidence of oral and pharyngeal cancer was recorded
incidence rate of oral and pharyngeal cancer in Denmark could be attributed to their higher alcohol intake than citizens of other Scandinavian countries and low intake of fruits and vegetables in general. Eastern Europe Hungary (23.3), Slovakia (16.4), and Romania (15.5) reported the highest
cancer, and nearly 12000 from the mouth, and the remainder from the oral cavity and pharynx. In the previous year, 1.6% of lip and oral cavity cancers were diagnosed, where the age-standardised incidence rate (ASIR) across all geographic regions of United States of
diagnosed, with incidence rates being more than twice as high in men than women.Oral cancer is one of the most-common types of cancer in Asia due to its association with smoking (tobacco, bidi), betel quid and alcohol consumption. Regionally incidence varies with highest
oral cancer ranged from 1.6 to 8.6/ 100,000 and 1.8 to 2.13/ 100,000 respectively. According to GLOBOCAN 2012, the estimated age-standardised rates of cancer incidence and mortality was higher in males than females. However, in some areas, specifically South East Asia, similar rates were recorded
51–55. In 2012, there were 97,400 deaths recorded due to oral cancer. India Oral cancer is the third-most-common form of cancer in India with over 77 000 new cases diagnosed in 2012 (2.3:1 male to female ratio). Studies estimate over five deaths per
2.3:1 male to female ratio). Studies estimate over five deaths per hour. One of the reasons behind such high incidence might be popularity of betel and areca nuts, which are considered to be risk factors for development of oral cavity cancers.There is limited data for the prevalence
parts of the mouth. The data suggests lip cancer has the highest incidence rate while gingival cancer has the lowest rate overall. In terms of mortality rates, oropharyngeal cancer has the highest rate in males and tongue cancer has the highest rate in females. Lip, palatal and gingival

most children survive this cancer, they may lose their vision in the affected eye(s) or need to have the eye removed.Almost half of children with retinoblastoma have a hereditary genetic defect associated with retinoblastoma. In other cases, it is caused by a congenital mutation in the chromosome
. In other cases, it is caused by a congenital mutation in the chromosome 13 gene 13q14 (retinoblastoma protein).The most common and obvious sign of retinoblastoma is an abnormal appearance of the retina as viewed through the pupil, the medical term for which is leukocoria, also known as amaurotic
is an abnormal appearance of the retina as viewed through the pupil, the medical term for which is leukocoria, also known as amaurotic cat's eye reflex. Other signs and symptoms include deterioration of vision, a red and irritated eye with glaucoma, and faltering growth or delayed development
the pupil, the medical term for which is leukocoria, also known as amaurotic cat's eye reflex. Other signs and symptoms include deterioration of vision, a red and irritated eye with glaucoma, and faltering growth or delayed development. Some children with retinoblastoma can develop a squint,
A positive diagnosis is usually made only with an examination under anesthetic (EUA). A white eye reflection is not always a positive indication of retinoblastoma and can be caused by light being reflected badly or by other conditions such as Coats' disease.The presence of the photographic fault
as Coats' disease.The presence of the photographic fault red eye in only one eye and not in the other may be a sign of retinoblastoma. A clearer sign is "white eye" or "cat's eye" (leukocoria).Mutation of genes, found in chromosomes, can
only one eye and not in the other may be a sign of retinoblastoma. A clearer sign is "white eye" or "cat's eye" (leukocoria).Mutation of genes, found in chromosomes, can affect the way in which cells grow and develop within the body. Alterations
in the other may be a sign of retinoblastoma. A clearer sign is "white eye" or "cat's eye" (leukocoria).Mutation of genes, found in chromosomes, can affect the way in which cells grow and develop within the body. Alterations in RB1 or MYCN can
cells grow and develop within the body. Alterations in RB1 or MYCN can give rise to retinoblastoma.In children with the heritable genetic form of retinoblastoma, a mutation occurs in the RB1 gene on chromosome 13. RB1 was the first tumor suppressor gene cloned. Although RB1 interacts with
proteins, its negative regulator effect on the cell cycle principally arises from binding and inactivation of the transcription factor E2F, thus repressing the transcription of genes which are required for the S phase.The defective RB1 gene can be inherited from either parent; in some children, however,
mutation occurs in the early stages of fetal development. The expression of the RB1 allele is autosomal dominant with 90% penetrance.Inherited forms of retinoblastomas are more likely to be bilateral. In addition, inherited uni- or bilateral retinoblastomas may be associated with pineoblastoma and other malignant midline supratentorial
as trilateral retinoblastoma. A recent meta-analysis has shown that survival of trilateral retinoblastoma has increased substantially over the last decades.The development of retinoblastoma can be explained by the two-hit model. According to the two-hit model, both alleles need to be affected,
results in the loss of the remaining normal allele (gene) and occurs within a particular retinal cell. In the sporadic, nonheritable form of retinoblastoma, both mutational events occur within a single retinal cell after fertilization (somatic events); sporadic retinoblastoma tends to be unilateral.Several
are with RB1 inactivation. There are cases reported with only one RB1 mutation or even two functional RB1 alleles, which indicates other oncogenic lesions of retinoblastoma. Somatic amplification of the MYCN oncogene is responsible for some cases of nonhereditary, early-onset, aggressive, unilateral retinoblastoma. MYCN
of nonhereditary, early-onset, aggressive, unilateral retinoblastoma. MYCN can act as a transcription factor and promotes proliferation by regulating the expression of cell cycle genes. Although MYCN amplification accounted for only 1.4% of retinoblastoma cases, researchers identified it in 18% of infants diagnosed at
can act as a transcription factor and promotes proliferation by regulating the expression of cell cycle genes. Although MYCN amplification accounted for only 1.4% of retinoblastoma cases, researchers identified it in 18% of infants diagnosed at less than 6 months of age. Median age at diagnosis for MYCN
regulating the expression of cell cycle genes. Although MYCN amplification accounted for only 1.4% of retinoblastoma cases, researchers identified it in 18% of infants diagnosed at less than 6 months of age. Median age at diagnosis for MYCN retinoblastoma was 4.5 months, compared with 24 months for
Although MYCN amplification accounted for only 1.4% of retinoblastoma cases, researchers identified it in 18% of infants diagnosed at less than 6 months of age. Median age at diagnosis for MYCN retinoblastoma was 4.5 months, compared with 24 months for those who had nonfamilial unilateral disease with two
with two RB1 gene mutations.Screening for retinoblastoma should be part of a "well baby" screening for newborns during the first 3 months of life, to include:The red reflex: checking for a normal reddish-orange reflection from the eye's retina with an ophthalmoscope or
newborns during the first 3 months of life, to include:The red reflex: checking for a normal reddish-orange reflection from the eye's retina with an ophthalmoscope or retinoscope from about 30 cm or 1 foot, usually done in a dimly lit or dark roomThe corneal light reflex
during the first 3 months of life, to include:The red reflex: checking for a normal reddish-orange reflection from the eye's retina with an ophthalmoscope or retinoscope from about 30 cm or 1 foot, usually done in a dimly lit or dark roomThe corneal light reflex
30 cm or 1 foot, usually done in a dimly lit or dark roomThe corneal light reflex or Hirschberg test: checking for symmetrical reflection of beam of light in the same spot on each eye when a light is shined into each cornea, to help determine whether the eyes are
or 1 foot, usually done in a dimly lit or dark roomThe corneal light reflex or Hirschberg test: checking for symmetrical reflection of beam of light in the same spot on each eye when a light is shined into each cornea, to help determine whether the eyes are crossedEye examination
genome are required for their development, but this does not imply that they are heritable, or transmitted to offspring). Around 55% of children with retinoblastoma have the nonheritable form. If no history of the disease exists within the family, the disease is labeled "sporadic"
indicate that it is the nonheritable form. Bilateral retinoblastomas are commonly heritable, while unilateral retinoblastomas are commonly nonheritable.In about two-thirds of cases, only one eye is affected (unilateral retinoblastoma); in the other third, tumors develop in both eyes (bilateral retinoblastoma)
is affected (unilateral retinoblastoma); in the other third, tumors develop in both eyes (bilateral retinoblastoma). The number and size of tumors on each eye may vary. In certain cases, the pineal gland or the suprasellar or parasellar region (or in very rare cases
(or in very rare cases other midline intracranial locations) is also affected (trilateral retinoblastoma). The position, size, and quantity of tumors are considered when choosing the type of treatment for the disease.1. Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous is a congenital developmental anomaly of the eye resulting
intracranial locations) is also affected (trilateral retinoblastoma). The position, size, and quantity of tumors are considered when choosing the type of treatment for the disease.1. Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous is a congenital developmental anomaly of the eye resulting from failure of the embryological, primary vitreous
shorter, develops a cataract, and may present with whitening of the pupil.2. Coats disease is a typically unilateral disease characterised by abnormal development of blood vessels behind the retina, leading to blood vessel abnormalities in the retina and retinal detachment to mimic retinoblastoma.3. Toxocariasis is a parasitic disease
Toxocariasis is a parasitic disease of the eye associated with exposure to infected puppies, which causes a retinal lesion leading to retinal detachment.4. Retinopathy of prematurity is associated with low-birth-weight infants who receive supplemental oxygen in the period immediately after birth, and it involves damage to
tumor. Bone marrow examination or lumbar puncture may also be done to determine any metastases to bones or the brain.Gross and microscopic appearances of retinoblastoma are identical in both hereditary and sporadic types. Macroscopically, viable tumor cells are found near blood vessels, while zones of necrosis are
microscopic appearances of retinoblastoma are identical in both hereditary and sporadic types. Macroscopically, viable tumor cells are found near blood vessels, while zones of necrosis are found in relatively avascular areas. Microscopically, both undifferentiated and differentiated elements may be present. Undifferentiated elements appear as collections of small
-Wintersteiner rosettes, Homer Wright rosettes,  and fleurettes from photoreceptor differentiation.																		Identifying the RB1 gene mutation that led to a child's retinoblastoma can be important in the clinical care of  the affected individual and in the care of (future) siblings and offspring. It
children, and other relatives can be tested for the mutation; if they do not carry the mutation, child relatives are not at risk of retinoblastoma, so need not undergo the trauma and expense of examinations under anaesthetic.  For the 85% of unilaterally affected  patients found
; if they do not carry the mutation, child relatives are not at risk of retinoblastoma, so need not undergo the trauma and expense of examinations under anaesthetic.  For the 85% of unilaterally affected  patients found not to carry either of their eye tumor RB1 mutations  
unilaterally affected  patients found not to carry either of their eye tumor RB1 mutations  in blood, neither molecular  testing nor clinical surveillance of siblings is required.If  the  RB1 mutation of an affected individual is identified, amniotic cells in an at-risk pregnancy can
invasion. CT scan is generally avoided because radiation can stimulate the formation of more eye tumours in those with RB1 genetic mutation.The priority of retinoblastoma treatment is to preserve the life of the child, then to preserve vision, and then to minimize complications or side effects of treatment
priority of retinoblastoma treatment is to preserve the life of the child, then to preserve vision, and then to minimize complications or side effects of treatment. The exact course of treatment depends on the individual case and is decided by the ophthalmologist in discussion with the paediatric oncologist. Correct
preserve the life of the child, then to preserve vision, and then to minimize complications or side effects of treatment. The exact course of treatment depends on the individual case and is decided by the ophthalmologist in discussion with the paediatric oncologist. Correct treatment also depends on the mutation
– The most common indication for EBR is for the eye in a young child with bilateral retinoblastoma who has active or recurrent disease after completion of chemotherapy and local therapies. However, patients with hereditary disease who received EBR therapy are reported to have a 35% risk of second cancers
or more frequently, in patients with small tumors or in those who had failed initial therapy including previous EBR therapy.Thermotherapy involves the application of heat directly to the tumor, usually in the form of infrared radiation. It is also used for small tumors.Laser photocoagulation  is
may be used as primary therapy for small peripheral tumors or for small recurrent tumors previously treated with other methods.Systemic chemotherapy has become forefront of treatment in the past decade, in the search for globe-preserving measures and to avoid the adverse effects of EBR therapy. The common
the neck, directly into the optic vessels.Nanoparticulate chemotherapy – To reduce the adverse effects of systemic therapy, subconjuctival (local) injection of nanoparticle carriers containing chemotherapeutic agents (carboplatin) has been developed, which has shown promising results in the treatment of retinoblastoma in animal models without
subconjuctival (local) injection of nanoparticle carriers containing chemotherapeutic agents (carboplatin) has been developed, which has shown promising results in the treatment of retinoblastoma in animal models without adverse effects.Chemoreduction is a combined approach using chemotherapy to initially reduce the size of the tumor, and adjuvant
world, retinoblastoma has one of the best cure rates of all childhood cancers (95-98%), with more than 90% of sufferers surviving into adulthood. In the UK, around 40 to 50 new cases are diagnosed each year.Good prognosis depends upon early presentation
Survivors of hereditary retinoblastoma have a higher risk of developing other cancers later in life.Retinoblastoma presents with cumulative lifetime incidence rate of one case of retinoblastoma per 18000 to 30000 live births worldwide. A higher incidence is noted in developing countries, which has been attributed to lower socioeconomic status
countries, which has been attributed to lower socioeconomic status and the presence of human papilloma virus sequences in the retinoblastoma tissue.Almost 80% of children with retinoblastoma are diagnosed before three years of age and diagnosis in children above six years of age is extremely rare. In the UK
status and the presence of human papilloma virus sequences in the retinoblastoma tissue.Almost 80% of children with retinoblastoma are diagnosed before three years of age and diagnosis in children above six years of age is extremely rare. In the UK, bilateral cases usually present within 14 to 16
in the retinoblastoma tissue.Almost 80% of children with retinoblastoma are diagnosed before three years of age and diagnosis in children above six years of age is extremely rare. In the UK, bilateral cases usually present within 14 to 16 months, while diagnosis of unilateral cases peaks between

bowel movements, weight loss, and fatigue.Most colorectal cancers are due to old age and lifestyle factors, with only a small number of cases due to underlying genetic disorders. Risk factors include diet, obesity, smoking, and lack of physical activity. Dietary factors that increase
disorders that can cause colorectal cancer include familial adenomatous polyposis and hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer; however, these represent less than 5% of cases. It typically starts as a benign tumor, often in the form of a polyp, which over time becomes cancerous.Bowel cancer
determine whether the disease has spread. Screening is effective for preventing and decreasing deaths from colorectal cancer. Screening, by one of a number of methods, is recommended starting from the age of 50 to 75. During colonoscopy, small polyps may be removed if found. If a
Their general use is not recommended for this purpose, however, due to side effects.Treatments used for colorectal cancer may include some combination of surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy and targeted therapy. Cancers that are confined within the wall of the colon may be curable with surgery,
the colon may be curable with surgery, while cancer that has spread widely is usually not curable, with management being directed towards improving quality of life and symptoms. The five-year survival rate in the United States is around 65%. The individual likelihood of survival depends on
towards improving quality of life and symptoms. The five-year survival rate in the United States is around 65%. The individual likelihood of survival depends on how advanced the cancer is, whether or not all the cancer can be removed with surgery and the person's overall health
not all the cancer can be removed with surgery and the person's overall health. Globally, colorectal cancer is the third most common type of cancer, making up about 10% of all cases. In 2018, there were 1.09 million new cases and 551,000 deaths from the disease
there were 1.09 million new cases and 551,000 deaths from the disease. It is more common in developed countries, where more than 65% of cases are found. It is less common in women than men.The signs and symptoms of colorectal cancer depend on the location of the
metastasis). The classic warning signs include: worsening constipation, blood in the stool, decrease in stool caliber (thickness), loss of appetite, loss of weight, and nausea or vomiting in someone over 50 years old. Around 50% of individuals with colorectal cancer do
classic warning signs include: worsening constipation, blood in the stool, decrease in stool caliber (thickness), loss of appetite, loss of weight, and nausea or vomiting in someone over 50 years old. Around 50% of individuals with colorectal cancer do not report any symptoms
(thickness), loss of appetite, loss of weight, and nausea or vomiting in someone over 50 years old. Around 50% of individuals with colorectal cancer do not report any symptoms.Rectal bleeding or anemia are high-risk symptoms in people over the age of 50
symptoms.Rectal bleeding or anemia are high-risk symptoms in people over the age of 50. Weight loss and changes in a person's bowel habit are typically only concerning if they are associated with rectal bleeding.75–95% of colorectal cancer cases occur in people with little or no genetic
% of colorectal cancer cases occur in people with little or no genetic risk. Risk factors include older age, male sex, high intake of fat, sugar, alcohol, red meat, processed meats, obesity, smoking, and a lack of physical exercise. Approximately 10%
fat, sugar, alcohol, red meat, processed meats, obesity, smoking, and a lack of physical exercise. Approximately 10% of cases are linked to insufficient activity. The risk from alcohol appears to increase at greater than one drink per day. Drinking 5 glasses of
of cases are linked to insufficient activity. The risk from alcohol appears to increase at greater than one drink per day. Drinking 5 glasses of water a day is linked to a decrease in the risk of colorectal cancer and adenomatous polyps. Streptococcus gallolyticus is associated with colorectal cancer.
cancer and adenomatous polyps. Streptococcus gallolyticus is associated with colorectal cancer. Some strains of Streptococcus bovis/Streptococcus equinus complex are consumed by millions of people daily and thus may be safe. 25 to 80% of people with Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus bacteremia have concomitant colorectal tumors. Seroprevalence
Some strains of Streptococcus bovis/Streptococcus equinus complex are consumed by millions of people daily and thus may be safe. 25 to 80% of people with Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus bacteremia have concomitant colorectal tumors. Seroprevalence of Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus is considered as a candidate practical marker for
as a candidate practical marker for the early prediction of an underlying bowel lesion at high risk population. It has been suggested that the presence of antibodies to Streptococcus bovis/gallolyticus antigens or the antigens themselves in the bloodstream may act as markers for the carcinogenesis in the colon.People
as markers for the carcinogenesis in the colon.People with inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease) are at increased risk of colon cancer. The risk increases the longer a person has the disease, and the worse the severity of inflammation. In these high risk
disease) are at increased risk of colon cancer. The risk increases the longer a person has the disease, and the worse the severity of inflammation. In these high risk groups, both prevention with aspirin and regular colonoscopies are recommended. Endoscopic surveillance in this high-risk population
through early diagnosis and may also reduce the chances of dying from colon cancer. People with inflammatory bowel disease account for less than 2% of colon cancer cases yearly. In those with Crohn's disease, 2% get colorectal cancer after 10 years, 8% after 20 years
a family history in two or more first-degree relatives (such as a parent or sibling) have a two to threefold greater risk of disease and this group accounts for about 20% of all cases. A number of genetic syndromes are also associated with higher rates of colorectal
colorectal cancer. The most common of these is hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC or Lynch syndrome) which is present in about 3% of people with colorectal cancer. Other syndromes that are strongly associated with colorectal cancer include Gardner syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). For
1% of the cancer cases. A total proctocolectomy may be recommended for people with FAP as a preventative measure due to the high risk of malignancy. Colectomy, removal of the colon, may not suffice as a preventative measure because of the high risk of rectal cancer if the
rectum remains. The most common polyposis syndrome affecting the colon is serrated polyposis syndrome, which is associated with a 25-40% risk of CRC.Mutations in the pair of genes (POLE and POLD1) have been associated with familial colon cancer.Most deaths due to colon cancer are
common polyposis syndrome affecting the colon is serrated polyposis syndrome, which is associated with a 25-40% risk of CRC.Mutations in the pair of genes (POLE and POLD1) have been associated with familial colon cancer.Most deaths due to colon cancer are associated with metastatic disease.
metastatic disease, metastasis associated in colon cancer 1 (MACC1), has been isolated. It is a transcriptional factor that influences the expression of hepatocyte growth factor. This gene is associated with the proliferation, invasion and scattering of colon cancer cells in cell culture, and tumor growth
. It is a transcriptional factor that influences the expression of hepatocyte growth factor. This gene is associated with the proliferation, invasion and scattering of colon cancer cells in cell culture, and tumor growth and metastasis in mice. MACC1 may be a potential target for cancer intervention, but
a potential target for cancer intervention, but this possibility needs to be confirmed with clinical studies.Epigenetic factors, such as abnormal DNA methylation of tumor suppressor promoters, play a role in the development of colorectal cancer.Ashkenazi Jews have a 6% higher risk rate of getting adenomas
.Colorectal cancer is a disease originating from the epithelial cells lining the colon or rectum of the gastrointestinal tract, most frequently as a result of mutations in the Wnt signaling pathway that increase signaling activity. The mutations can be inherited or acquired, and most probably occur in the intestinal
APC, β-catenin accumulates to high levels and translocates (moves) into the nucleus, binds to DNA, and activates the transcription of proto-oncogenes. These genes are normally important for stem cell renewal and differentiation, but when inappropriately expressed at high levels, they can
of all human genes are expressed in colorectal cancer, with just over 1% of having increased expression in colorectal cancer compared to other forms of cancer. Some genes are oncogenes: they are overexpressed in colorectal cancer. For example, genes encoding the proteins KRAS, RAF, and
and PI3K, which normally stimulate the cell to divide in response to growth factors, can acquire mutations that result in over-activation of cell proliferation. The chronological order of mutations is sometimes important. If a previous APC mutation occurred, a primary KRAS mutation often progresses to
the cell to divide in response to growth factors, can acquire mutations that result in over-activation of cell proliferation. The chronological order of mutations is sometimes important. If a previous APC mutation occurred, a primary KRAS mutation often progresses to cancer rather than a self-limiting
increased activity of MYC, a central player in colorectal cancer.Mismatch repair (MMR) deficient tumours are characterized by a relatively high amount of poly-nucleotide tandem repeats. This is caused by a deficiency in MMR proteins – which are typically caused by epigenetic silencing and or inherited
to progress.The polyp to cancer progression sequence is the classical model of colorectal cancer pathogenesis. The polyp to cancer sequence describes the phases of transition from benign tumours into colorectal cancer over many years. Central to the polyp to CRC sequence are gene mutations, epigenetic alterations and local
or "field" of epithelium that has been preconditioned (by what were largely unknown processes at the time) to predispose it towards development of cancer. Since then, the terms "field cancerization", "field carcinogenesis", "field defect", and "field effect
likely to arise.Field defects are important in progression to colon cancer.However, as pointed out by Rubin, "The vast majority of studies in cancer research has been done on well-defined tumors in vivo, or on discrete neoplastic foci in vitro. Yet there is
growth of apparently normal cells. Likewise, epigenetic alterations present in tumors may have occurred in pre-neoplastic field defects.An expanded view of field effect has been termed "etiologic field effect", which encompasses not only molecular and pathologic changes in pre-neoplastic cells but also
“passenger” mutations. The oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are well studied and are described above under Pathogenesis.In addition to epigenetic alteration of expression of miRNAs, other common types of epigenetic alterations in cancers that change gene expression levels include direct hypermethylation or hypomethylation of CpG islands of
” mutations. The oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are well studied and are described above under Pathogenesis.In addition to epigenetic alteration of expression of miRNAs, other common types of epigenetic alterations in cancers that change gene expression levels include direct hypermethylation or hypomethylation of CpG islands of protein-
to epigenetic alteration of expression of miRNAs, other common types of epigenetic alterations in cancers that change gene expression levels include direct hypermethylation or hypomethylation of CpG islands of protein-encoding genes and alterations in histones and chromosomal architecture that influence gene expression. As an example, 147 hypermethylations and
of expression of miRNAs, other common types of epigenetic alterations in cancers that change gene expression levels include direct hypermethylation or hypomethylation of CpG islands of protein-encoding genes and alterations in histones and chromosomal architecture that influence gene expression. As an example, 147 hypermethylations and 27 hypomethylations of
of protein-encoding genes and alterations in histones and chromosomal architecture that influence gene expression. As an example, 147 hypermethylations and 27 hypomethylations of protein coding genes were frequently associated with colorectal cancers. Of the hypermethylated genes, 10 were hypermethylated in 100% of colon cancers, and
hypermethylations and 27 hypomethylations of protein coding genes were frequently associated with colorectal cancers. Of the hypermethylated genes, 10 were hypermethylated in 100% of colon cancers, and many others were hypermethylated in more than 50% of colon cancers. In addition, 11 hypermethylations and 96 hypomethylations of
. Of the hypermethylated genes, 10 were hypermethylated in 100% of colon cancers, and many others were hypermethylated in more than 50% of colon cancers. In addition, 11 hypermethylations and 96 hypomethylations of miRNAs were also associated with colorectal cancers. Abnormal (aberrant) methylation occurs
of colon cancers, and many others were hypermethylated in more than 50% of colon cancers. In addition, 11 hypermethylations and 96 hypomethylations of miRNAs were also associated with colorectal cancers. Abnormal (aberrant) methylation occurs as a normal consequence of normal aging and the risk of colorectal
development of colorectal cancer. These findings may suggest a reason for age being associated with the increased risk of developing colorectal cancer.Epigenetic reductions of DNA repair enzyme expression may likely lead to the genomic and epigenomic instability characteristic of cancer. As summarized in the articles Carcinogenesis and Neoplasm,
is occasionally due to a mutation in a DNA repair gene, but is much more frequently due to epigenetic alterations that reduce or silence expression of DNA repair genes.Epigenetic alterations involved in the development of colorectal cancer may affect a person's response to chemotherapy.Colorectal cancer diagnosis is
to epigenetic alterations that reduce or silence expression of DNA repair genes.Epigenetic alterations involved in the development of colorectal cancer may affect a person's response to chemotherapy.Colorectal cancer diagnosis is performed by sampling of areas of the colon suspicious for possible tumor development, typically during colonoscopy or
the lesion. It is confirmed by microscopical examination of a tissue sample.A colorectal cancer is sometimes initially discovered on CT scan.Presence of metastases is determined by a CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis. Other potential imaging tests such as PET and MRI may be
used for rectal lesions to determine its local stage and to facilitate preoperative planning.The histopathologic characteristics of the tumor are reported from the analysis of tissue taken from a biopsy or surgery. A pathology report contains a description of the microscopical characteristics of the tumor tissue, including both tumor
both tumor cells and how the tumor invades into healthy tissues and finally if the tumor appears to be completely removed. The most common form of colon cancer is adenocarcinoma, constituting between 95% to 98% of all cases of colorectal cancer. Other, rarer types include lymphoma,
Immunohistochemistry may be used in uncertain cases.Staging of the cancer is based on both radiological and pathological findings. As with most other forms of cancer, tumor staging is based on the TNM system which considers how much the initial tumor has spread and the presence of metastases in lymph
most other forms of cancer, tumor staging is based on the TNM system which considers how much the initial tumor has spread and the presence of metastases in lymph nodes and more distant organs. The AJCC 8th edition was published in 2018.It has been estimated that about half of colorectal cancer
, consuming a diet high in fiber, and reducing smoking and alcohol consumption decrease the risk.Lifestyle risk factors with strong evidence include lack of exercise, cigarette smoking, alcohol, and obesity. The risk of colon cancer can be reduced by maintaining a normal body weight through a
consumption decrease the risk.Lifestyle risk factors with strong evidence include lack of exercise, cigarette smoking, alcohol, and obesity. The risk of colon cancer can be reduced by maintaining a normal body weight through a combination of sufficient exercise and eating a healthy diet.Starting in the
and retrospective observational studies. However, large scale prospective studies have failed to demonstrate a significant protective effect, and due to the multiple causes of cancer and the complexity of studying correlations between diet and health, it is uncertain whether any specific dietary interventions (outside of eating a healthy
studies have not borne this out, and status of the science remained unclear as of 2014. A 2019 review, however, found evidence of benefit from dietary fiber and whole grains. The World Cancer Research Fund listed the benefit of fiber for prevention of colorectal cancer as "probable
. A 2019 review, however, found evidence of benefit from dietary fiber and whole grains. The World Cancer Research Fund listed the benefit of fiber for prevention of colorectal cancer as "probable" as of 2017.Higher physical activity is recommended. Physical exercise is associated with a modest reduction
recommended. Physical exercise is associated with a modest reduction in colon but not rectal cancer risk. High levels of physical activity reduce the risk of colon cancer by about 21%. Sitting regularly for prolonged periods is associated with higher mortality from colon cancer. The risk is not negated
cancer in those at high risk. Aspirin is recommended in those who are 50 to 60 years old, do not have an increased risk of bleeding, and are at risk for cardiovascular disease to prevent colorectal cancer. It is not recommended in those at average risk.There is
for calcium supplementation, but it is not sufficient to make a recommendation. Vitamin D intake and blood levels are associated with a lower risk of colon cancer.As more than 80% of colorectal cancers arise from adenomatous polyps, screening for this cancer is effective for both early detection
than 80% of colorectal cancers arise from adenomatous polyps, screening for this cancer is effective for both early detection and for prevention. Diagnosis of cases of colorectal cancer through screening tends to occur 2–3 years before diagnosis of cases with symptoms. Any polyps that are detected can be removed
cancer is effective for both early detection and for prevention. Diagnosis of cases of colorectal cancer through screening tends to occur 2–3 years before diagnosis of cases with symptoms. Any polyps that are detected can be removed, usually by colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, and thus prevent them from turning into
occult blood testing, and flexible sigmoidoscopy. Of the three, only sigmoidoscopy cannot screen the right side of the colon where 42% of cancers are found. Flexible sigmoidoscopy, however, has the best evidence for decreasing the risk of death from any cause.Fecal occult blood
right side of the colon where 42% of cancers are found. Flexible sigmoidoscopy, however, has the best evidence for decreasing the risk of death from any cause.Fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) of the stool is typically recommended every two years and can be either guaiac
For people with average risk who have had a high-quality colonoscopy with normal results, the American Gastroenterological Association does not recommend any type of screening in the 10 years following the colonoscopy. For people over 75 or those with a life expectancy of less than 10 years, screening
national colorectal screening programs which offer FOBT screening for all adults within a certain age group, typically starting between ages 50 to 60. Examples of countries with organised screening include the United Kingdom, Australia,  the Netherlands, Hong Kong and Taiwan.The treatment of colorectal cancer can
treatment of colorectal cancer can be aimed at cure or palliation. The decision on which aim to adopt depends on various factors, including the person's health and preferences, as well as the stage of the tumor. When colorectal cancer is caught early, surgery can be curative. However
of colorectal cancer can be aimed at cure or palliation. The decision on which aim to adopt depends on various factors, including the person's health and preferences, as well as the stage of the tumor. When colorectal cancer is caught early, surgery can be curative. However
as comfortable as possible.If the cancer is found at a very early stage, it may be removed during a colonoscopy using a variety of techniques including EMR and ESD. For people with localized cancer, the preferred treatment is complete surgical removal with adequate margins, with the attempt
people with localized cancer, the preferred treatment is complete surgical removal with adequate margins, with the attempt of achieving a cure. The procedure of choice is a partial colectomy (or proctocolectomy for rectal lesions) where the affected part of the colon or rectum is removed along with parts
may also be removed. Sometimes chemotherapy is used before surgery to shrink the cancer before attempting to remove it. The two most common sites of recurrence of colorectal cancer are the liver and lungs.In the “Surgical Resection of Liver Metastases From Colorectal Carcinoma Survival According to Radical Liver
attempting to remove it. The two most common sites of recurrence of colorectal cancer are the liver and lungs.In the “Surgical Resection of Liver Metastases From Colorectal Carcinoma Survival According to Radical Liver Resection and to Prognostic Factors“ the Autors stated that the surgical resection of the liver
), and is potentially the only curative treatment. Their results shows that if radical (R0) liver resection was achieved, the number of metastases, their location (unilobar vs bilobar), and the occurrence of extrahepatic metastases did not affect 3 year survival.In both cancer
cancer of the colon and rectum, chemotherapy may be used in addition to surgery in certain cases. The decision to add chemotherapy in management of colon and rectal cancer depends on the stage of the disease.In Stage I colon cancer, no chemotherapy is offered, and surgery is
the stage of the disease.In Stage I colon cancer, no chemotherapy is offered, and surgery is the definitive treatment. The role of chemotherapy in Stage II colon cancer is debatable, and is usually not offered unless risk factors such as T4 tumor, undifferentiated tumor, vascular
abnormalities of the mismatch repair genes do not benefit from chemotherapy. For stage III and Stage IV colon cancer, chemotherapy is an integral part of treatment.If cancer has spread to the lymph nodes or distant organs, which is the case with stage III and stage IV colon cancer
cancer respectively, adding chemotherapy agents fluorouracil, capecitabine or oxaliplatin increases life expectancy. If the lymph nodes do not contain cancer, the benefits of chemotherapy are controversial. If the cancer is widely metastatic or unresectable, treatment is then palliative. Typically in this setting, a number of
CRC are CAPOX, FOLFOX, FOLFOXIRI, and FOLFIRI. Antiangiogenic drugs such as bevacizumab are often added in first line therapy. Another class of drugs used in the second line setting are epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors, of which the two FDA approved ones are cetuximab and panitumumab.
of which the two FDA approved ones are cetuximab and panitumumab.The primary difference in the approach to low stage rectal cancer is the incorporation of radiation therapy. Often, it is used in conjunction with chemotherapy in a neoadjuvant fashion to enable surgical resection, so that ultimately a colostomy
to stage IV colon cancer.Stage IV colorectal cancer due to peritoneal carcinomatosis can be treated using HIPEC in some people.While a combination of radiation and chemotherapy may be useful for rectal cancer, for some people requiring treatment, chemoradiotherapy can increase acute treatment-related toxicity, and
and has not been shown to improve survival rates compared to radiotherapy alone, although it is associated with less local recurrence.  The use of radiotherapy in colon cancer is not routine due to the sensitivity of the bowels to radiation. As with chemotherapy, radiotherapy can be used as
is not possible radiation therapy has been suggested to be an effective treatment against CRC pulmonary metastases, which are developed by 10-15% of people with CRC.Immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors has been found to be useful for a type of colorectal cancer with mismatch repair deficiency and microsatellite instability
recommended for any person who has advanced colon cancer or who has significant symptoms.Involvement of palliative care may be beneficial to improve the quality of life for both the person and his or her family, by improving symptoms, anxiety and preventing admissions to the hospital.In people with
care can consist of procedures that relieve symptoms or complications from the cancer but do not attempt to cure the underlying cancer, thereby improving quality of life. Surgical options may include non-curative surgical removal of some of the cancer tissue, bypassing part of the intestines, or stent
and intestinal obstruction. Non-operative methods of symptomatic treatment include radiation therapy to decrease tumor size as well as pain medications.The aims of follow-up are to diagnose, in the earliest possible stage, any metastasis or tumors that develop later, but did not originate from
originate from the original cancer (metachronous lesions).The U.S. National Comprehensive Cancer Network and American Society of Clinical Oncology provide guidelines for the follow-up of colon cancer. A medical history and physical examination are recommended every 3 to 6 months for 2 years, then every 6 months for 5
CT-scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis can be considered annually for the first 3 years for people who are at high risk of recurrence (for example, those who had poorly differentiated tumors or venous or lymphatic invasion) and are candidates for curative surgery (with the
cancer survivors. In epidemiological studies, exercise may decrease colorectal cancer-specific mortality and all-cause mortality. Results for the specific amounts of exercise needed to observe a benefit were conflicting. These differences may reflect differences in tumour biology and expression of biomarkers. Patients with tumors that
. Results for the specific amounts of exercise needed to observe a benefit were conflicting. These differences may reflect differences in tumour biology and expression of biomarkers. Patients with tumors that lacked CTNNB1 expression (β-catenin), involved in Wnt signalling pathway, required more than 18 Metabolic
β-catenin), involved in Wnt signalling pathway, required more than 18 Metabolic equivalent (MET) hours per week, a measure of exercise, to observe a reduction in colorectal cancer mortality. The mechanism of how exercise benefits survival may be involved in immune surveillance and inflammation
. Oxidative balance may be another possible mechanism for benefits observed. A significant decrease in 8-oxo-dG was found in the urine of people who underwent 2 weeks of moderate exercise after primary therapy. Other possible mechanisms may involve metabolic hormone and sex-steroid hormones, although
after primary therapy. Other possible mechanisms may involve metabolic hormone and sex-steroid hormones, although these pathways may be involved in other types of cancersAnother potential biomarker may be p27. Survivors with tumors that expressed p27 and performed greater and equal to 18 MET hours per week were found
those with less than 18 MET hours per week. Survivors without p27 expression who exercised were shown to have worse outcomes. The constitutive activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway may explain the loss of p27 and excess energy balance may up-regulate p27 to stop cancer cells from
without p27 expression who exercised were shown to have worse outcomes. The constitutive activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway may explain the loss of p27 and excess energy balance may up-regulate p27 to stop cancer cells from dividing.Fewer than 600 genes are linked to outcomes in
is 5% for stage I cancers, 12% in stage II and 33% in stage III. However, depending on the number of risk factors it ranges from 9–22% in stage II and 17–44% in stage III.In Europe the five-year survival rate for colorectal cancer
in stage III.In Europe the five-year survival rate for colorectal cancer is less than 60%. In the developed world about a third of people who get the disease die from it.Survival is directly related to detection and the type of cancer involved, but overall is poor
In the developed world about a third of people who get the disease die from it.Survival is directly related to detection and the type of cancer involved, but overall is poor for symptomatic cancers, as they are typically quite advanced. Survival rates for early stage detection are about
cancer every year resulting in about 715,000 deaths as of 2010 up from 490,000 in 1990.As of 2012, it is the second most common cause of cancer in women (9.2% of diagnoses) and the third most common in men (10.0%) with it being the fourth most
deaths as of 2010 up from 490,000 in 1990.As of 2012, it is the second most common cause of cancer in women (9.2% of diagnoses) and the third most common in men (10.0%) with it being the fourth most common cause of cancer death after lung
women (9.2% of diagnoses) and the third most common in men (10.0%) with it being the fourth most common cause of cancer death after lung, stomach, and liver cancer. It is more common in developed than developing countries. Globally incidences vary 10-
, New Zealand, Europe and the US and lowest rates in Africa and South-Central Asia.Colorectal cancer is the second highest cause of cancer occurrence and death for men and women in the United States combined. An estimated 141,210 cases were diagnosed in 2011.Based on rates from 2007
their lifetime. From 2005 to 2009, the median age at diagnosis for cancer of the colon and rectum in the US was 69 years of age. Approximately 0.1% were diagnosed under age 20; 1.1% between 20 and 34; 4.0% between 35 and 44; 13.4
% between 55 and 64; 24.0% between 65 and 74; 25.0% between 75 and 84; and 12.0% 85+ years of age. Rates are higher among males (54 per 100,000 c.f. 40 per 100,000 for females).In the UK about 41,000 people a year get
Australia will develop colorectal cancer before the age of 75; one in 10 men and one in 15 women will develop it by 85 years of age.Rectal cancer has been diagnosed in an Ancient Egyptian mummy who had lived in the Dakhleh Oasis during the Ptolemaic period.In the
and progression of colorectal cancer through several mechanisms such as antioxidant activity, immunomodulation, promoting programmed cell death, antiproliferative effects, and epigenetic modification of cancer cells.Mouse models of colorectal and intestinal cancer have been developed and are used in research.The Cancer Genome AtlasThe Colorectal Cancer Atlas

into basic categories and which of these entities exist on the most fundamental level. Ontology is traditionally listed as a part of the major branch of philosophy known as metaphysics.The compound word ontology ('study of being') combinesonto- (Greek: ὄν, on; GEN.
level. Ontology is traditionally listed as a part of the major branch of philosophy known as metaphysics.The compound word ontology ('study of being') combinesonto- (Greek: ὄν, on; GEN. ὄντος, ontos, 'being' or 'that which is'
The Eleatic principle is one answer to this question: it states that being is inextricably tied to causation, that "Power is the mark of Being". This answer assigns fully real, concrete, or factual existence to actual singular particular processes, events, or natural objects,
"to be is to be perceived". Intimately related but not identical to the question of 'being qua being' is the problem of categories. Categories are usually seen as the highest kinds or genera. A system of categories provides a classification of entities that is exclusive and
question of 'being qua being' is the problem of categories. Categories are usually seen as the highest kinds or genera. A system of categories provides a classification of entities that is exclusive and exhaustive: every entity belongs to exactly one category. Various such classifications have been proposed
being' is the problem of categories. Categories are usually seen as the highest kinds or genera. A system of categories provides a classification of entities that is exclusive and exhaustive: every entity belongs to exactly one category. Various such classifications have been proposed, they often include categories
entity belongs to exactly one category. Various such classifications have been proposed, they often include categories for substances, properties, relations, states of affairs or events. At the core of the differentiation between categories are various fundamental ontological concepts and distinctions, for example, the concepts of
of affairs or events. At the core of the differentiation between categories are various fundamental ontological concepts and distinctions, for example, the concepts of particularity and universality, of abstractness and concreteness, of ontological dependence, of identity and of modality. These concepts are sometimes treated as categories
different times, which is why they are sometimes referred to as repeatables in contrast to non-repeatable particulars. The so-called problem of universals is the problem to explain how different things can agree in their features, e.g. how a tomato and a strawberry can both be red
e.g. how a tomato and a strawberry can both be red. Realists about universals believe that there are universals. They can solve the problem of universals by explaining the commonality through a universal shared by both entities. Realists are divided among themselves as to whether universals can exist independently of
agree that there is an exclusive and exhaustive distinction between concrete objects and abstract objects. Some philosophers consider this to be the most general division of being. Examples of concrete objects include plants, human beings and planets while things like numbers, sets and propositions are abstract objects. But
and propositions are abstract objects. But despite the general agreement concerning the paradigm cases, there is less consensus as to what the characteristic marks of concreteness and abstractness are. Popular suggestions include defining the distinction in terms of the difference between (1) existence inside or outside space-
entity, as the surface of an apple depends on its specific apple. Generic dependence, on the other hand, involves a weaker form of dependence, on merely a certain type of entity. For example, electricity generically depends on there being charged particles, but it does not
depends on its specific apple. Generic dependence, on the other hand, involves a weaker form of dependence, on merely a certain type of entity. For example, electricity generically depends on there being charged particles, but it does not depend on any specific charged particle. Dependence
any specific charged particle. Dependence-relations are relevant to ontology since it is often held that ontologically dependent entities have a less robust form of being. This way a hierarchy is introduced into the world that brings with it the distinction between more and less fundamental entities.Identity is
and the same mother in another sense (numerical identity). Two qualitatively identical things are often said to be indiscernible. The two senses of sameness are linked by two principles: the principle of indiscernibility of identicals and the principle of identity of indiscernibles. The principle of indiscernibility of
). Two qualitatively identical things are often said to be indiscernible. The two senses of sameness are linked by two principles: the principle of indiscernibility of identicals and the principle of identity of indiscernibles. The principle of indiscernibility of identicals is uncontroversial and states that if two entities are
Two qualitatively identical things are often said to be indiscernible. The two senses of sameness are linked by two principles: the principle of indiscernibility of identicals and the principle of identity of indiscernibles. The principle of indiscernibility of identicals is uncontroversial and states that if two entities are numerically identical
often said to be indiscernible. The two senses of sameness are linked by two principles: the principle of indiscernibility of identicals and the principle of identity of indiscernibles. The principle of indiscernibility of identicals is uncontroversial and states that if two entities are numerically identical with each other then they
to be indiscernible. The two senses of sameness are linked by two principles: the principle of indiscernibility of identicals and the principle of identity of indiscernibles. The principle of indiscernibility of identicals is uncontroversial and states that if two entities are numerically identical with each other then they exactly resemble
two senses of sameness are linked by two principles: the principle of indiscernibility of identicals and the principle of identity of indiscernibles. The principle of indiscernibility of identicals is uncontroversial and states that if two entities are numerically identical with each other then they exactly resemble each other. The principle
of sameness are linked by two principles: the principle of indiscernibility of identicals and the principle of identity of indiscernibles. The principle of indiscernibility of identicals is uncontroversial and states that if two entities are numerically identical with each other then they exactly resemble each other. The principle of identity
indiscernibility of identicals is uncontroversial and states that if two entities are numerically identical with each other then they exactly resemble each other. The principle of identity of indiscernibles, on the other hand, is more controversial in making the converse claim that if two entities exactly resemble each other then
identicals is uncontroversial and states that if two entities are numerically identical with each other then they exactly resemble each other. The principle of identity of indiscernibles, on the other hand, is more controversial in making the converse claim that if two entities exactly resemble each other then they must
two spheres with the same features. Black argues that the two spheres are indiscernible but not identical, thereby constituting a violation of the principle of identity of indiscernibles.The problem of identity over time concerns the question of persistence: whether or in what sense two objects at different times
with the same features. Black argues that the two spheres are indiscernible but not identical, thereby constituting a violation of the principle of identity of indiscernibles.The problem of identity over time concerns the question of persistence: whether or in what sense two objects at different times can be
Black argues that the two spheres are indiscernible but not identical, thereby constituting a violation of the principle of identity of indiscernibles.The problem of identity over time concerns the question of persistence: whether or in what sense two objects at different times can be numerically identical. This is
indiscernible but not identical, thereby constituting a violation of the principle of identity of indiscernibles.The problem of identity over time concerns the question of persistence: whether or in what sense two objects at different times can be numerically identical. This is usually referred to as diachronic identity in
it is impossible to step into the same river twice because of the changes that occurred in-between. The traditional position on the problem of persistence is endurantism, the thesis that diachronic identity in a strict sense is possible. One problem with this position is that it seems to
, the thesis that diachronic identity in a strict sense is possible. One problem with this position is that it seems to violate the principle of indiscernibility of identicals: the object may have undergone changes in the meantime resulting in it being discernible from itself. Perdurantism or four-dimensionalism
thesis that diachronic identity in a strict sense is possible. One problem with this position is that it seems to violate the principle of indiscernibility of identicals: the object may have undergone changes in the meantime resulting in it being discernible from itself. Perdurantism or four-dimensionalism is an
many philosophical problems plaguing endurantism, but endurantism seems to be more in touch with how we ordinarily conceive diachronic identity.Modality concerns the concepts of possibility, actuality and necessity. In contemporary discourse, these concepts are often defined in terms of possible worlds. A possible world is a
is at its core actual and that possible worlds should be understood in terms of actual entities, for example, as fictions or as sets of sentences. Possibilists, on the other hand, assign to possible worlds the same fundamental ontological status as to the actual world. This is
Necessary beings, on the other hand, could not have failed to exist. It has been suggested that this distinction is the highest division of being.The category of substances has played a central role in many ontological theories throughout the history of philosophy. "Substance" is a
other hand, could not have failed to exist. It has been suggested that this distinction is the highest division of being.The category of substances has played a central role in many ontological theories throughout the history of philosophy. "Substance" is a technical term within philosophy not
that this distinction is the highest division of being.The category of substances has played a central role in many ontological theories throughout the history of philosophy. "Substance" is a technical term within philosophy not to be confused with the more common usage in the sense of chemical substances
. A substances can survive a change of accidental properties but it cannot lose its essential properties, which constitute its nature.The category of properties consists of entities that can be exemplified by other entities, e.g. by substances. Properties characterize their bearers, they express what their bearer
shared by different substances. Nominalists, on the other hand, deny that universals exist. Some nominalists try to account for properties in terms of resemblance relations or class membership. Another alternative for nominalists is to conceptualize properties as simple particulars, so-called tropes. This position entails
do not share the same particular property on this view: the two color-tropes are numerically distinct. Another important question for any theory of properties is how to conceive the relation between a bearer and its properties. Substratum theorists hold that there is some kind of substance, substratum
for any theory of properties is how to conceive the relation between a bearer and its properties. Substratum theorists hold that there is some kind of substance, substratum or bare particular that acts as bearer. Bundle theory is an alternative view that does away with a substratum altogether: objects
acts as bearer. Bundle theory is an alternative view that does away with a substratum altogether: objects are taken to be just a bundle of properties. They are held together not by a substratum but by the so-called compresence-relation responsible for the bundling. Both substratum
a sugar cube is a categorical property while its tendency to dissolve in water is a dispositional property. For many properties there is a lack of consensus as to how they should be classified, for example, whether colors are categorical or dispositional properties. Categoricalism is the thesis that on
Relations are in many ways similar to properties in that both characterize the things they apply to. Properties are sometimes treated as a special case of relations involving only one relatum. Central for ontology is the distinction between internal and external relations. A relation is internal if it is fully
internal if it is fully determined by the features of its relata. For example, an apple and a tomato stand in the internal relation of similarity to each other because they are both red. Some philosophers have inferred from this that internal relations do not have a proper ontological status
stands in an external relation to a table by lying on top of it. But this is not determined by the book's or the table's features like their color, their shape, etc.States of affairs are complex entities, in contrast to substances and properties, which are
in an external relation to a table by lying on top of it. But this is not determined by the book's or the table's features like their color, their shape, etc.States of affairs are complex entities, in contrast to substances and properties, which are
it. But this is not determined by the book's or the table's features like their color, their shape, etc.States of affairs are complex entities, in contrast to substances and properties, which are usually conceived as simple. Complex entities are built up from or
to substances and properties, which are usually conceived as simple. Complex entities are built up from or constituted by other entities. Atomic states of affairs are constituted by one particular and one property exemplified by this particular. For example, the state of affairs that Socrates is wise is
by other entities. Atomic states of affairs are constituted by one particular and one property exemplified by this particular. For example, the state of affairs that Socrates is wise is constituted by the particular "Socrates" and the property "wise". Relational states of affairs involve several
, the state of affairs that Socrates is wise is constituted by the particular "Socrates" and the property "wise". Relational states of affairs involve several particulars and a relation connecting them. States of affairs that obtain are also referred to as facts. It is controversial which
the particular "Socrates" and the property "wise". Relational states of affairs involve several particulars and a relation connecting them. States of affairs that obtain are also referred to as facts. It is controversial which ontological status should be ascribed to states of affairs that do not
connecting them. States of affairs that obtain are also referred to as facts. It is controversial which ontological status should be ascribed to states of affairs that do not obtain. States of affairs have been prominent in 20th-century ontology as various theories were proposed to describe the world
are also referred to as facts. It is controversial which ontological status should be ascribed to states of affairs that do not obtain. States of affairs have been prominent in 20th-century ontology as various theories were proposed to describe the world as composed of states of affairs. It
obtain. States of affairs have been prominent in 20th-century ontology as various theories were proposed to describe the world as composed of states of affairs. It is often held that states of affairs play the role of truthmakers: judgments or assertions are true because the corresponding state of
20th-century ontology as various theories were proposed to describe the world as composed of states of affairs. It is often held that states of affairs play the role of truthmakers: judgments or assertions are true because the corresponding state of affairs obtains.Events take place in time,
various theories were proposed to describe the world as composed of states of affairs. It is often held that states of affairs play the role of truthmakers: judgments or assertions are true because the corresponding state of affairs obtains.Events take place in time, they are sometimes thought of
of affairs. It is often held that states of affairs play the role of truthmakers: judgments or assertions are true because the corresponding state of affairs obtains.Events take place in time, they are sometimes thought of as involving a change in the form of acquiring or losing a
more dominant view is that events are particulars and therefore non-repeatable. Some events are complex in that they are composed of a sequence of events, often referred to as a process. But even simple events can be conceived as complex entities involving an object, a time and
questions for the more specific sciences, but they do not belong to ontology in the Quinean sense.Polycategorical ontologies are concerned with the categories of being. Each polycategorical ontology posits a number of categories. These categories are exclusive and exhaustive: every existing entity belongs to exactly one category
do not belong to ontology in the Quinean sense.Polycategorical ontologies are concerned with the categories of being. Each polycategorical ontology posits a number of categories. These categories are exclusive and exhaustive: every existing entity belongs to exactly one category. A recent example of a polycategorical ontology is
distinction is between particular entities (objects and modes) and universal entities (kinds and attributes). Reality is built up through the interplay of entities belonging to different categories: particular entities instantiate universal entities, and non-substantial entities characterize substantial entities.Hierarchical ontologies are interested in
to different categories: particular entities instantiate universal entities, and non-substantial entities characterize substantial entities.Hierarchical ontologies are interested in the degree of fundamentality of the entities they posit. Their main goal is to figure out which entities are fundamental and how the non-fundamental entities depend
posit. Their main goal is to figure out which entities are fundamental and how the non-fundamental entities depend on them. The concept of fundamentality is usually defined in terms of metaphysical grounding. Fundamental entities are different from non-fundamental entities because they are not grounded in other
distinct objects we encounter in our everyday affairs like cars or other people exist. It only denies that these objects have the most fundamental form of existence. An example of a hierarchical ontology in continental philosophy comes from Nicolai Hartmann. He asserts that reality is made up of four levels
category-ontologies: they both hold that all fundamental entities belong to the same category. They disagree on whether this category is the category of things or of facts. A slogan for fact ontologies comes from Ludwig Wittgenstein: "The world is the totality of facts, not of
category is the category of things or of facts. A slogan for fact ontologies comes from Ludwig Wittgenstein: "The world is the totality of facts, not of things".One difficulty in characterizing this dispute is to elucidate what things and facts are, and how they differ from
and objects of an assertion refer to things while the assertion as a whole refers to a fact.Reism in continental philosophy is one form of thing ontology. Franz Brentano developed a version of reism in his later philosophy. He held that only concrete particular things exist. Things can
the assertion as a whole refers to a fact.Reism in continental philosophy is one form of thing ontology. Franz Brentano developed a version of reism in his later philosophy. He held that only concrete particular things exist. Things can exist in two forms: either as spatio-
why he developed a method to paraphrase these expressions in order to avoid these ontological commitments.D. M. Armstrong is a well-known defender of fact ontology. He and his followers refer to facts as states of affairs. States of affairs are the basic building blocks of his ontology
these ontological commitments.D. M. Armstrong is a well-known defender of fact ontology. He and his followers refer to facts as states of affairs. States of affairs are the basic building blocks of his ontology: they have particulars and universals as their constituents but they are primary
D. M. Armstrong is a well-known defender of fact ontology. He and his followers refer to facts as states of affairs. States of affairs are the basic building blocks of his ontology: they have particulars and universals as their constituents but they are primary in relation to particulars
building blocks of his ontology: they have particulars and universals as their constituents but they are primary in relation to particulars and universals. States of affairs have ontologically independent existence while "[u]npropertied particulars and uninstantiated universals are false abstractions".Constituent ontologies and blob theories, sometimes referred to
and uninstantiated universals are false abstractions".Constituent ontologies and blob theories, sometimes referred to as relational ontologies, are concerned with the internal structure of objects. Constituent ontologies hold that objects have an internal structure made up of constituents. This is denied by blob theories: they contend that
that an object is nothing but the properties it "has". On this account, a regular apple could be characterized as a bundle of redness, roundness, sweetness, etc. Defenders of bundle theory disagree on the nature of the bundled properties. Some affirm that these properties
has". On this account, a regular apple could be characterized as a bundle of redness, roundness, sweetness, etc. Defenders of bundle theory disagree on the nature of the bundled properties. Some affirm that these properties are universals while others contend that they are particulars,
universals while others contend that they are particulars, so-called "tropes".Class nominalism, on the other hand, is a form of blob theory. Class nominalists hold that properties are classes of things. To instantiate a property is merely to be a member of the corresponding
called "tropes".Class nominalism, on the other hand, is a form of blob theory. Class nominalists hold that properties are classes of things. To instantiate a property is merely to be a member of the corresponding class. So properties are not constituents of the objects that
are not constituents of the objects that have them.In information science ontologies are classified in various ways, using criteria such as the degree of abstraction and field of application:Upper ontology: concepts supporting development of an ontology, meta-ontology.Domain ontology: concepts relevant to
the objects that have them.In information science ontologies are classified in various ways, using criteria such as the degree of abstraction and field of application:Upper ontology: concepts supporting development of an ontology, meta-ontology.Domain ontology: concepts relevant to a particular topic,
:Upper ontology: concepts supporting development of an ontology, meta-ontology.Domain ontology: concepts relevant to a particular topic, domain of discourse, or area of interest, for example, to information technology or to computer. languages, or to particular branches of science.
supporting development of an ontology, meta-ontology.Domain ontology: concepts relevant to a particular topic, domain of discourse, or area of interest, for example, to information technology or to computer. languages, or to particular branches of science.Interface ontology: concepts relevant
, domain of discourse, or area of interest, for example, to information technology or to computer. languages, or to particular branches of science.Interface ontology: concepts relevant to the juncture of two disciplines.Process ontology: inputs, outputs, constraints, sequencing information,
the works of Descartes, has been central to many disputes in the Western philosophical tradition. Samkhya sees the mind as being the subtle part of prakṛti. It is made up of three faculties: the sense mind (manas), the intellect (buddhi), and the ego
or "personal god" (Ishvara). These two schools stand in contrast to Advaita Vedanta, which is committed to a strict form of monism by holding that the apparent plurality of things is an illusion (Maya) hiding the true oneness of reality at its most fundamental level
. These two schools stand in contrast to Advaita Vedanta, which is committed to a strict form of monism by holding that the apparent plurality of things is an illusion (Maya) hiding the true oneness of reality at its most fundamental level (Brahman).In the Greek philosophical tradition, Parmenides
is committed to a strict form of monism by holding that the apparent plurality of things is an illusion (Maya) hiding the true oneness of reality at its most fundamental level (Brahman).In the Greek philosophical tradition, Parmenides was among the first to propose an ontological characterization of the fundamental
at its most fundamental level (Brahman).In the Greek philosophical tradition, Parmenides was among the first to propose an ontological characterization of the fundamental nature of existence. In the prologue (or  proem) to On Nature, he describes two views of existence. Initially, nothing comes from
an ontological characterization of the fundamental nature of existence. In the prologue (or  proem) to On Nature, he describes two views of existence. Initially, nothing comes from nothing, thus existence is eternal. This posits that existence is what may be conceived of by thought
, there may be neither void nor vacuum; and true reality neither may come into being nor vanish from existence. Rather, the entirety of creation is eternal, uniform, and immutable, though not infinite (Parmenides characterized its shape as that of a perfect sphere). Parmenides
thus posits that change, as perceived in everyday experience, is illusory.Opposite to the Eleatic monism of Parmenides is the  pluralistic conception of being. In the 5th century BC, Anaxagoras and Leucippus replaced the reality of being (unique and unchanging) with that of becoming,
position" in the cosmos. Atoms are, besides, creating the whole with the intrinsic movement in the vacuum, producing the diverse flux of being. Their movement is influenced by the parenklisis (Lucretius names it clinamen) and that is determined by chance. These ideas foreshadowed the
that is determined by chance. These ideas foreshadowed the understanding of  traditional physics until the advent of 20th-century theories on the nature of atoms. Plato Plato developed the distinction between true reality and illusion, in arguing that what is real are eternal and unchanging  forms or
in which all existent things participate and which they have in common (though it is unclear whether "Being" is intended in the sense of existence, copula, or identity); and argues, against Parmenides, that forms must exist not only of being, but also of
Negation and of non-being (or Difference). Aristotle In his  Categories, Aristotle (384–322 BCE) identifies ten possible kinds of things that may be the subject or the predicate of a proposition. For Aristotle there are four different ontological dimensions:according to the various
would involve a contradiction. Aquinas Fundamental to Thomas Aquinas's ontology is his distinction between essence and existence: all entities are conceived as composites of essence and existence. The essence of a thing is what this thing is like, it signifies the definition of this thing. God has
, for example, in our ability to understand the essence of something without knowing about its existence. Aquinas conceives of existence as an act of being that actualizes the potency given by the essence. Different things have different essences, which impose different limits on the corresponding act of being
act of being that actualizes the potency given by the essence. Different things have different essences, which impose different limits on the corresponding act of being. The paradigm examples of essence-existence-composites are material substances like cats or trees. Aquinas incorporates Aristotle's distinction between matter
potency given by the essence. Different things have different essences, which impose different limits on the corresponding act of being. The paradigm examples of essence-existence-composites are material substances like cats or trees. Aquinas incorporates Aristotle's distinction between matter and form by holding that the
a change of an accidental form but ceases to exist upon a change of a substantial form.Ontology is increasingly seen as a separate domain of philosophy in the modern period. Many ontological theories of this period were rationalistic in the sense that they saw ontology largely as a deductive discipline
On his view, minds are thinking things while bodies are extended things. Thought and extension are two attributes that each come in various modes of being. Modes of thinking include judgments, doubts, volitions, sensations and emotions while the shapes of material things are modes of extension.
minds are thinking things while bodies are extended things. Thought and extension are two attributes that each come in various modes of being. Modes of thinking include judgments, doubts, volitions, sensations and emotions while the shapes of material things are modes of extension. Modes come with a
various modes of being. Modes of thinking include judgments, doubts, volitions, sensations and emotions while the shapes of material things are modes of extension. Modes come with a lower degree of reality since they depend for their existence on a substance. Substances, on the other hand
judgments, doubts, volitions, sensations and emotions while the shapes of material things are modes of extension. Modes come with a lower degree of reality since they depend for their existence on a substance. Substances, on the other hand, can exist on their own. Descartes'
He refers to this substance as "God or Nature", emphasizing both his pantheism and his naturalism. This substance has an infinite amount of attributes, which he defines as "what the intellect perceives of substance as constituting its essence". Of these attributes, only two are
the human mind: thought and extension. Modes are properties of a substance that follow from its attributes and therefore have only a dependent form of existence. Spinoza sees everyday-things like rocks, cats or ourselves as mere modes and thereby opposes the traditional Aristotelian and Cartesian conception of
. Causal relations only happen within a system while the different systems run in parallel without causally interacting with each other. Spinoza calls the system of modes Natura naturata ("nature natured") and opposes it to Natura naturans ("nature naturing"), the attributes responsible for
in Spinoza's system is necessary: there are no contingent entities. This is so since the attributes are themselves necessary and since the system of modes follows from them. Wolff Christian Wolff defines ontology as the science of being in general. He sees it as a part of metaphysics
system of modes follows from them. Wolff Christian Wolff defines ontology as the science of being in general. He sees it as a part of metaphysics besides cosmology, psychology and natural theology. According to Wolff, it is a deductive science, knowable a priori and based on two
and natural theology. According to Wolff, it is a deductive science, knowable a priori and based on two fundamental principles: the principle of non-contradiction ("it cannot happen that the same thing is and is not") and the principle of sufficient reason (
without actual existence consists in all the determinations that make up the essential nature of this thing. Wolff refers to this as a "reason of being" and contrasts it with a "reason of becoming", which explains why some things have actual existence. Schopenhauer Arthur Schopenhauer was
up the essential nature of this thing. Wolff refers to this as a "reason of being" and contrasts it with a "reason of becoming", which explains why some things have actual existence. Schopenhauer Arthur Schopenhauer was a proponent of metaphysical voluntarism: he regards will as
. But, unlike the Kantian thing-in-itself, the will has an experiential component to it: it comes in the form of striving, desiring, feeling, etc. The manifold of things we encounter in our everyday experiences, like trees or cars, are mere
, the will has an experiential component to it: it comes in the form of striving, desiring, feeling, etc. The manifold of things we encounter in our everyday experiences, like trees or cars, are mere appearances that lack existence independent of the observer. Schopenhauer describes
phenomenology, linguistic analysis and naturalism. Phenomenological ontology, as exemplified by Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger, relies for its method on the description of experience. Linguistic analysis assigns to language a central role for ontology, as seen, for example, in Rudolf Carnap's thesis that the
Linguistic analysis assigns to language a central role for ontology, as seen, for example, in Rudolf Carnap's thesis that the truth value of existence-claims depends on the linguistic framework in which they are made. Naturalism gives a prominent position to the natural sciences for the purpose
gives a prominent position to the natural sciences for the purpose of finding and evaluating ontological claims. This position is exemplified by Quine's method of ontology, which involves analyzing the ontological commitments of scientific theories. Husserl Edmund Husserl sees ontology as a science of essences. Sciences of essences
exemplified by Quine's method of ontology, which involves analyzing the ontological commitments of scientific theories. Husserl Edmund Husserl sees ontology as a science of essences. Sciences of essences are contrasted with factual sciences: the former are knowable a priori and provide the foundation for the later, which
method of ontology, which involves analyzing the ontological commitments of scientific theories. Husserl Edmund Husserl sees ontology as a science of essences. Sciences of essences are contrasted with factual sciences: the former are knowable a priori and provide the foundation for the later, which are knowable a posteriori
sciences: the former are knowable a priori and provide the foundation for the later, which are knowable a posteriori. Ontology as a science of essences is not interested in actual facts, but in the essences themselves, whether they have instances or not. Husserl distinguishes between formal ontology
actual facts, but in the essences themselves, whether they have instances or not. Husserl distinguishes between formal ontology, which investigates the essence of objectivity in general, and regional ontologies, which study regional essences that are shared by all entities belonging to the region. Regions correspond to
correspond to the highest genera of concrete entities: material nature, personal consciousness and interpersonal spirit. Husserl's method for studying ontology and sciences of essence in general is called eidetic variation. It involves imagining an object of the kind under investigation and varying its features. The changed feature
and varying its features. The changed feature is inessential to this kind if the object can survive its change, otherwise it belongs to the kind's essence. For example, a triangle remains a triangle if one of its sides is extended but it ceases to be a triangle if a
varying its features. The changed feature is inessential to this kind if the object can survive its change, otherwise it belongs to the kind's essence. For example, a triangle remains a triangle if one of its sides is extended but it ceases to be a triangle if a
the human being, or Dasein, in Heidegger's terminology. The reason for this is that we already have a pre-ontological understanding of being that shapes how we experience the world. Phenomenology can be used to make this implicit understanding explicit, but it has to be accompanied
used to make this implicit understanding explicit, but it has to be accompanied by hermeneutics in order to avoid the distortions due to the forgetfulness of being. In his later philosophy, Heidegger attempted to reconstruct the "history of being" in order to show how the different epochs in
hermeneutics in order to avoid the distortions due to the forgetfulness of being. In his later philosophy, Heidegger attempted to reconstruct the "history of being" in order to show how the different epochs in the history of philosophy were dominated by different conceptions of being. His goal is
In his later philosophy, Heidegger attempted to reconstruct the "history of being" in order to show how the different epochs in the history of philosophy were dominated by different conceptions of being. His goal is to retrieve the original experience of being present in the early Greek thought that
to reconstruct the "history of being" in order to show how the different epochs in the history of philosophy were dominated by different conceptions of being. His goal is to retrieve the original experience of being present in the early Greek thought that was covered up by later philosophers.
in the early Greek thought that was covered up by later philosophers. Hartmann Nicolai Hartmann is a 20th-century philosopher within the continental tradition of philosophy. He interprets ontology as Aristotle's science of being qua being: the science of the most general characteristics of entities, usually referred
within the continental tradition of philosophy. He interprets ontology as Aristotle's science of being qua being: the science of the most general characteristics of entities, usually referred to as categories, and the relations between them. According to Hartmann, the most general categories are moments of being
characteristics of entities, usually referred to as categories, and the relations between them. According to Hartmann, the most general categories are moments of being (existence and essence), modes of being (reality and ideality) and modalities of being (possibility, actuality and necessity)
, and the relations between them. According to Hartmann, the most general categories are moments of being (existence and essence), modes of being (reality and ideality) and modalities of being (possibility, actuality and necessity). Every entity has both existence and essence.
Hartmann, the most general categories are moments of being (existence and essence), modes of being (reality and ideality) and modalities of being (possibility, actuality and necessity). Every entity has both existence and essence. Reality and ideality, by contrast, are two
returnable and always existing while real entities are individual, unique and destructible. Among the ideal entities are mathematical objects and values. The modalities of being are divided into the absolute modalities (actuality and non-actuality) and the relative modalities (possibility, impossibility and necessity).
, biological, psychological and spiritual) that form a hierarchy. Carnap Rudolf Carnap proposed that the truth value of ontological statements about the existence of entities depends on the linguistic framework in which these statements are made: they are internal to the framework. As such, they are often
at best pragmatic considerations about which framework to choose and at worst outright meaningless, according to Carnap. For example, there is no matter of fact as to whether realism or idealism is true, their truth depends on the adopted framework. The job of philosophers is not to discover
, there is no matter of fact as to whether realism or idealism is true, their truth depends on the adopted framework. The job of philosophers is not to discover which things exist by themselves but "conceptual engineering": to create interesting frameworks and to explore the consequences of
which things exist by themselves but "conceptual engineering": to create interesting frameworks and to explore the consequences of adopting them. The choice of framework is guided by practical considerations like expedience or fruitfulness since there is no framework-independent notion of truth. Quine The notion of ontological
consequences of adopting them. The choice of framework is guided by practical considerations like expedience or fruitfulness since there is no framework-independent notion of truth. Quine The notion of ontological commitment plays a central role in Willard Van Orman Quine's contributions to ontology. A theory is ontologically
for example to "everyday conceptions expressed in natural language".The concept of ontological formations refers to formations of social relations understood as dominant ways of living. Temporal, spatial, corporeal, epistemological, and performative relations are taken to be central to understanding a dominant formation. That is
performative relations are taken to be central to understanding a dominant formation. That is, a particular ontological formation is based on how ontological categories of time, space, embodiment, knowing and performing are lived—objectively and subjectively. Different ontological formations include the customary (including the tribal
, the traditional, the modern, and the postmodern. The concept was first introduced by Paul James in 2006, together with a series of writers including Damian Grenfell and Manfred Steger.In the engaged theory approach, ontological formations are seen as layered and intersecting rather than singular formations
Manfred Steger.In the engaged theory approach, ontological formations are seen as layered and intersecting rather than singular formations. They are 'formations of being'. This approach avoids the usual problems of a Great Divide being posited between the modern and the pre-modern. From a
avoids the usual problems of a Great Divide being posited between the modern and the pre-modern. From a philosophical distinction concerning different formations of being, the concept then provides a way of translating into practical understandings concerning how humans might design cities and communities that live creatively across different
completely dominated by modern valences of spatial configuration. Here the work of Tony Fry is important.According to Edward N. Zalta, the ontology of fiction analyses such sentences as:'Nero worshipped (the god) Mars;''Mars, the god, does not exist;' and'Eliza Doolittle, in George Bernard
does not exist';Treating fictional characters as if they were 'real', such as 'Superman can leap tall buildings;' andDiscourse about works of fiction, such as 'Professor Higgins was created by George Bernard Shaw'.Jeremy Bentham distinguished three kinds of entities:the real: those
buildings;' andDiscourse about works of fiction, such as 'Professor Higgins was created by George Bernard Shaw'.Jeremy Bentham distinguished three kinds of entities:the real: those that can be perceived, or can be inferred from perception.the fictitious: abstractions that referred to perceptible things.the fabulous
that they do not really exist.Francis Herbert Bradley thought that real things exist respectively at particular times and places. He recognised several kinds of entity:the genuinely historical;the fictional;the real;the merely imagined;the existent; andthe non-existent.Alexius Meinong would put fictional entities into the category which
with cogito, ergo sum (je pense donc je suis, "I think, therefore I am"), argued that a person's thinking agency, his res cogitans, as distinct from his material body, his res extensa, is something that we can know exists with
a proof of the certainty of the existence of God, using the ontological argument that had been formulated first by Anselm of Canterbury.Schools of subjectivism, objectivism and relativism existed at various times in the 20th century, and the postmodernists and body philosophers tried to reframe all these questions
objectivism and relativism existed at various times in the 20th century, and the postmodernists and body philosophers tried to reframe all these questions in terms of bodies taking some specific action in an environment. This relied to a great degree on insights derived from scientific research into animals taking instinctive action
. Others, mostly philosophers, tried to dig into the word and its usage. Martin Heidegger distinguished human being as existence from the being of things in the world. Heidegger proposes that our way of being human and the way the world is for us are cast historically through a
ontological meanings both generate and are regenerated in everyday interactions, the locus of our way of being in a historical epoch is the communicative event of language in use. For Heidegger, however, communication in the first place is not among human beings, but language itself shapes up in
up in response to questioning (the inexhaustible meaning of) being. Even the focus of traditional ontology on the 'whatness' or quidditas of beings in their substantial, standing presence can be shifted to pose the question of the 'whoness' of human being itself.Some philosophers
of human being itself.Some philosophers suggest that the question of "What is?" is (at least in part) an issue of usage rather than a question about facts. This perspective is conveyed by an analogy made by Donald Davidson: Suppose a person refers to a
simply use 'there are' differently than we do. The question of What is? is at least partially a topic in the philosophy of language, and is not entirely about ontology itself. This viewpoint has been expressed by Eli Hirsch.Hirsch interprets Hilary Putnam as asserting that
of "being" in Indo-European language philosophy may need to make distinctions between these senses.In human geography there are two types of ontology: small "o" which accounts for the practical orientation, describing functions of being a part of the group, thought to oversimplify
several occasions in the life of Socrates, and also to several occasions in the lives of Alcibiades, and of others. But the notion of man is real; it derives its reality from its reference to those many actual occasions, each of which is an actual entity. An
actual entity is completely concrete, with no potential to be something other than itself. It is what it is. It is a source of potentiality for the creation of other actual entities, of which it may be said to be a part cause. Likewise it is the concretion
the creation of other actual entities, of which it may be said to be a part cause. Likewise it is the concretion or realization of potentialities of other actual entities which are its partial causes.Causation between actual entities is essential to their actuality. Consequently, for Whitehead,
that the actual entities should be all alike, qua actual entities; they should all satisfy a single definite set of well stated ontological criteria of actuality.Whitehead proposed that his notion of an occasion of experience satisfies the criteria for its status as the philosophically preferred definition of an actual
entities; they should all satisfy a single definite set of well stated ontological criteria of actuality.Whitehead proposed that his notion of an occasion of experience satisfies the criteria for its status as the philosophically preferred definition of an actual entity. From a purely logical point of view, each
of an occasion of experience satisfies the criteria for its status as the philosophically preferred definition of an actual entity. From a purely logical point of view, each occasion of experience has in full measure the characters of both objective and subjective reality. Subjectivity and objectivity refer to different aspects
satisfies the criteria for its status as the philosophically preferred definition of an actual entity. From a purely logical point of view, each occasion of experience has in full measure the characters of both objective and subjective reality. Subjectivity and objectivity refer to different aspects of an occasion of experience
occasion of experience has in full measure the characters of both objective and subjective reality. Subjectivity and objectivity refer to different aspects of an occasion of experience, and in no way do they exclude each other.Examples of other philosophical proposals or candidates as actual entities, in this view
view, are Aristotle's 'substances', Leibniz' monads, and Descartes'  res verae, and the more modern 'states of affairs'. Aristotle's substances, such as Socrates, have behind them as more fundamental the 'primary substances', and in this
Whitehead is not happy with Leibniz' monads as actual entities because they are "windowless" and do not cause each other. 'States of affairs' are often not closely defined, often without specific mention of extension in physical Minkowski space; they are therefore not necessarily processes of
are "windowless" and do not cause each other. 'States of affairs' are often not closely defined, often without specific mention of extension in physical Minkowski space; they are therefore not necessarily processes of becoming, but may be as their name suggests, simply static states
of affairs' are often not closely defined, often without specific mention of extension in physical Minkowski space; they are therefore not necessarily processes of becoming, but may be as their name suggests, simply static states in some sense. States of affairs are contingent on particulars, and
; they are therefore not necessarily processes of becoming, but may be as their name suggests, simply static states in some sense. States of affairs are contingent on particulars, and therefore have something behind them. One summary of the Whiteheadian actual entity is that it is a process
affairs are contingent on particulars, and therefore have something behind them. One summary of the Whiteheadian actual entity is that it is a process of becoming. Another summary, referring to its causal linkage to other actual entities, is that it is "all window", in contrast
if they refer to actual entities. Whitehead calls this 'the ontological principle'.There is an established and long philosophical history of the concept of atoms as microscopic physical objects. They are far too small to be visible to the naked eye. It was as recent as the nineteenth
was due to the theoretical investigation of Brownian motion by Albert Einstein in the very early twentieth century. But even then, the real existence of atoms was debated by some. Such debate might be labeled 'microcosmic ontology'. Here the word 'microcosm' is used to indicate
advanced, including those made by Islamic philosophers Mulla Sadra and Allama Tabatabai.Jaakko Hintikka puts the view that a useful explication of the notion of existence is in the words "one can find," implicitly in some world or universe of discourse.Citations"Ontology" . Encyclopædia Britannica.
view that a useful explication of the notion of existence is in the words "one can find," implicitly in some world or universe of discourse.Citations"Ontology" . Encyclopædia Britannica. 20 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 118."Logic and Ontology" entry  by Thomas
is a rare medical condition in which benign tumors (papilloma) form along the aerodigestive tract. There are two variants based on the age of onset: juvenile and adult laryngeal papillomatosis. The tumors are caused by human papillomavirus (HPV) infection of the throat. The tumors may
lead to narrowing of the airway, which may cause vocal changes or airway obstruction. Laryngeal papillomatosis is initially diagnosed through indirect laryngoscopy upon observation of growths on the larynx and can be confirmed through a biopsy. Treatment for laryngeal papillomatosis aims to remove the papillomas and limit their recurrence.
quality. More specifically, hoarseness is observed. As a consequence of the narrowing of the laryngeal or tracheal parts of the airway, shortness of breath, chronic cough and stridor (i.e. noisy breathing which can sound like a whistle or a snore), can be present. As
genotypes 6 and 11 although genotypes 16, 18, 31, and 33 have also been implicated. HPV-11 is associated with more aggressive forms of papillomatosis, which may involve more distal parts of the tracheobronchial tree. The mode of viral inoculation is hypothesized to vary according to age of
of papillomatosis, which may involve more distal parts of the tracheobronchial tree. The mode of viral inoculation is hypothesized to vary according to age of disease onset. The presence of HPV in the respiratory tract does not necessarily result in the development of laryngeal papillomatosis. Other factors that could
-Barr virus).The disease is typically separated into two forms, juvenile and adult papillomatosis, based on whether it develops before or after 20 years of age. The juvenile form is generally transmitted through contact with a mother's infected vaginal canal during childbirth. Less is known about transmission in
during childbirth. Less is known about transmission in the adult form of this disease, though oral sex has been implicated as a potential mode of transmission. However, it is uncertain whether oral sex would directly transmit the virus or activate the dormant virus that was transmitted at childbirth.
a child born of an infected mother developing laryngeal papillomatosis is low (between 1 in 231 to 1 in 400), even if the mother's infection is active. Risk factors for a higher likelihood of transmission at childbirth include the first birth, vaginal birth, and teenage mother.
child born of an infected mother developing laryngeal papillomatosis is low (between 1 in 231 to 1 in 400), even if the mother's infection is active. Risk factors for a higher likelihood of transmission at childbirth include the first birth, vaginal birth, and teenage mother.
(between 1 in 231 to 1 in 400), even if the mother's infection is active. Risk factors for a higher likelihood of transmission at childbirth include the first birth, vaginal birth, and teenage mother.There are three big risk factors that contribute to the acquirement
, through the nose and into the throat to visualize the larynx from above. This procedure is also called flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy.The appearance of papillomas has been described as multiple or rarely, single, white growths with a lumpy texture similar to cauliflower. Papillomas usually present in the
growth. Biopsy samples are collected under general anesthesia, either through direct laryngoscopy or fiberoptic bronchoscopy.Little is known in terms of effective means of prevention, if the mother is infected with HPV.  (HPV vaccination can prevent these infections in the mother, and thereby eliminate the
prevent these infections in the mother, and thereby eliminate the possibility of the virus infecting the baby.)  Due to the low likelihood of transmission even from an infected mother, it is not recommended to expose the mother and child to the additional risks of caesarean section to prevent
of laryngeal papillomatosis often triggers more aggressive relapses than the adult form. Between recurrences, voice therapy may be used to restore or maintain the person's voice function.The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues
laryngeal papillomatosis often triggers more aggressive relapses than the adult form. Between recurrences, voice therapy may be used to restore or maintain the person's voice function.The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues
than the adult form. Between recurrences, voice therapy may be used to restore or maintain the person's voice function.The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues and the individual's voice, as
.The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues and the individual's voice, as well as ensure that the airway remains unobstructed by the disease. However, surgery does not prevent recurrences, and can lead
The first line of treatment is surgery to remove papillomas. Typically performed using a laryngeal endoscopy, surgery can protect intact tissues and the individual's voice, as well as ensure that the airway remains unobstructed by the disease. However, surgery does not prevent recurrences, and can lead
a number of serious complications. Laser technology, and carbon dioxide laser surgery in particular, has been used since the 1970s for the removal of papillomas; however, laser surgery is not without its risks, and has been associated with a higher occurrence of respiratory tract burns, stenosis
debulking surgery failures have led to airways being compromised. The tracheotomies use breathing tubes to reroute air around the affected area, thereby restoring the person's breathing function. Although this intervention is usually temporary, some people must use the tube indefinitely. This method should be avoided if at all
surgery failures have led to airways being compromised. The tracheotomies use breathing tubes to reroute air around the affected area, thereby restoring the person's breathing function. Although this intervention is usually temporary, some people must use the tube indefinitely. This method should be avoided if at all
is a tool that can suction tissue into a blade, which then cuts the tissue. Microdebriders are gradually replacing laser technology as the treatment of choice for laryngeal papillomatosis, due to their ability to selectively suction papillomas while relatively sparing unaffected tissue. In addition to the lower risk of
of choice for laryngeal papillomatosis, due to their ability to selectively suction papillomas while relatively sparing unaffected tissue. In addition to the lower risk of complications, microdebrider surgery also is reportedly less expensive, less time-consuming, and more likely to give the person a better voice quality
time-consuming, and more likely to give the person a better voice quality than the traditional laser surgery approaches.For about 20% of people, surgery is not sufficient to control their laryngeal papillomatosis, and additional nonsurgical and/or medical treatments are necessary. As of 2015, these
HPV vaccines can be used therapeutically (after the infection has occurred).  For most patients, the HPV vaccine significantly increases the length of time needed between surgeries.The evolution of laryngeal papillomatosis is highly unpredictable and is characterized by modulation of its severity and variable rate of progression
length of time needed between surgeries.The evolution of laryngeal papillomatosis is highly unpredictable and is characterized by modulation of its severity and variable rate of progression across individuals. While instances of total recovery are observed, the condition is often persistent and lesions can reappear even after treatment. Factors
extralaryngeal sites. In more aggressive cases, infection of the lungs can occur with progressive airway obstruction. Although rare (less than 1% of people with laryngeal papillomatosis), transformation from a benign form to a malignant form is also observed. Death can result from these complications (
Death can result from these complications (morbidity rate is around 1-2%).Laryngeal papillomatosis is a rare disease with a bimodal distribution based on age of incidence. The incidence, or number of new cases, of laryngeal papillomatosis cases is at approximately 4.3 cases per 100 000 children and 1.8
children peaks before the age of 5, though the term juvenile papillomatosis refers to all cases occurring before the age of 20. The incidence of adult laryngeal papillomatosis, which has an onset after the age of 20, peaks between the ages of 20 and 40. While there are
as socioeconomic status, such that higher rates are observed in groups having a lower socioeconomic status.Because of its relative commonness and the cost of treatments, more money is spent on treating RRP than on any other benign airway tumor.As of 2015 use of the measles-mumps
on treating RRP than on any other benign airway tumor.As of 2015 use of the measles-mumps-rubella vaccine to reduce rate of recurrences had been investigated, but had not yielded significant results.List of cutaneous conditions
on the outside of the neck or oral cavity. Given the location of these cancers, trouble breathing may also be present.The majority of head and neck cancer is caused by the use of alcohol or tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, with increasing cases linked to the human papillomavirus
Given the location of these cancers, trouble breathing may also be present.The majority of head and neck cancer is caused by the use of alcohol or tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, with increasing cases linked to the human papillomavirus (HPV). Other risk factors include Epstein-
activity, but confirmation will likely not be known until around 2060. This is because oropharyngeal cancer typical presents in the 4th - 6th decade of life, and this is a relatively new vaccine. While screening in the general population does not appear to be useful, screening high risk
often is curable if it is diagnosed early; however, outcomes are typically poor if it is diagnosed late. Treatment may include a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Previous diagnosis and treatment of one head and neck cancer confers higher risk of developing
cancer confers higher risk of developing a second head and neck cancer or recurrence.Globally, head and neck cancer accounts for 650,000 new cases of cancer and 330,000 deaths annually on average. In 2018, it was the seventh most common cancer worldwide with 890,000 new cases documented and 450,000
United States, head and neck cancer makes up 3% of all cancer cases (averaging 53,000 new diagnoses per year) and 1.5% of cancer deaths  Notably, head and neck cancer secondary to chronic alcohol or tobacco use has been steadily declining as less of the population chronically
swelling, and visible lumps on the outside of the neck or oral cavity. Head and neck cancer often begins with benign signs and symptoms of disease, like an enlarged lymph node on the outside of the neck, a hoarse-sounding voice or progressive worsening cough or sore throat
enlarged lymph node on the outside of the neck, a hoarse-sounding voice or progressive worsening cough or sore throat. In the case of head and neck cancer, these symptoms will be notably persistent and become chronic. There may be a lump or a sore in the throat
heal, bleeding from the mouth or numbness, bad breath, discolored patches that persist in the mouth, a sore tongue, and slurring of speech if the cancer is affecting the tongue. There may also be congested sinuses, weight loss, and some numbness or paralysis of facial
numbness or paralysis of facial muscles.Squamous cell cancers are common in areas of the mouth, including the inner lip, tongue, floor of mouth, gums, and hard palate. Cancers of the mouth are strongly associated with tobacco use, especially use of chewing tobacco or dipping
, tongue, floor of mouth, gums, and hard palate. Cancers of the mouth are strongly associated with tobacco use, especially use of chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco, as well as heavy alcohol use. Cancers of this region, particularly the tongue, are more frequently treated
cancers.Surgeries for oral cancers include:Maxillectomy (can be done with or without orbital exenteration)Mandibulectomy (removal of the lower jaw or part of it)Glossectomy (tongue removal, can be total, hemi or partial)Radical neck dissectionCombinational e.g., glossectomy and laryngectomy done together.The defect is typically
). Laryngeal cancer is strongly associated with tobacco smoking.Surgery can include laser excision of small vocal cord lesions, partial laryngectomy (removal of part of the larynx) or total laryngectomy (removal of the whole larynx). If the whole larynx has been removed, the person
, adenocarcinomas, adenoid cystic carcinomas, and mucoepidermoid carcinomas. Rarer still are melanomas and lymphomas of the upper aerodigestive tract.Around 75% of cases are caused by alcohol and tobacco use.Tobacco smoking is one of the main risk factors for head and neck cancer. A major
A major carcinogenic compound in tobacco smoke is acrylonitrile. Acrylonitrile appears to indirectly cause DNA damage by increasing oxidative stress, leading to increased levels of 8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG) and formamidopyrimidine in DNA. (see image). Both 8-oxo-dG
a lifetime increased risk for head and neck cancers that is 5- to 25-fold increased over the general population.The ex-smoker's risk for developing a head and neck cancer begins to approach the risk in the general population 15 years after smoking cessation. The high prevalence
risk for developing a head and neck cancer begins to approach the risk in the general population 15 years after smoking cessation. The high prevalence of tobacco and alcohol use worldwide and the high association of these cancers with these substances makes them ideal targets for enhanced cancer prevention.Smokeless tobacco
oral cancer and oropharyngeal cancer. Cigar smoking is also an important risk factor for oral cancer.Other environmental carcinogens suspected of being potential causes of head and neck cancer include occupational exposures such as nickel ore refining, exposure to textile fibers, and woodworking. Use of marijuana, especially
being potential causes of head and neck cancer include occupational exposures such as nickel ore refining, exposure to textile fibers, and woodworking. Use of marijuana, especially when younger, has been linked to an increase in squamous-cell carcinoma cases in at least one study, while other
other studies suggest use is not shown to be associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma, or associated with decreased squamous cell carcinoma.Excessive consumption of eggs, processed meats, and red meat were associated with increased rates of cancer of the head and neck in one study, while consumption
carcinoma, or associated with decreased squamous cell carcinoma.Excessive consumption of eggs, processed meats, and red meat were associated with increased rates of cancer of the head and neck in one study, while consumption of raw and cooked vegetables seemed to be protective.Vitamin E was not
neck in one study, while consumption of raw and cooked vegetables seemed to be protective.Vitamin E was not found to prevent the development of leukoplakia, the white plaques that are the precursor for carcinomas of the mucosal surfaces, in adult smokers.Another study examined a combination of
%), and least often in the oral cavity (12%–18%) and larynx (3%–7%).Some experts estimate that while up to 50% of cancers of the tonsil may be infected with HPV, only 50% of these are likely to be caused by HPV (as opposed to
HPV16 status is associated with improved prognosis over HPV-negative OSCC.HPV can induce tumor by several mechanisms:E6 and E7 oncogenic proteins.Disruption of tumor suppressor genes.High-level DNA amplifications, for example, oncogenes.Generating alternative nonfunctional transcripts .interchromosomal rearrangements.Distinct host genome methylation
nonfunctional transcripts .interchromosomal rearrangements.Distinct host genome methylation and expression patterns, produced even when virus isn't integrated into the host genome.Induction of cancer can be associated for the expression of viral oncoproteins, the most important E6 and E7, or other mechanisms many of them run by
the most important E6 and E7, or other mechanisms many of them run by the integration such as the generation of altered transcripts, disruption of tumor suppressors, high levels of DNA amplifications, interchromosomial rearrangements, or changes in DNA methylation patterns, the latter being able to find even
, or other mechanisms many of them run by the integration such as the generation of altered transcripts, disruption of tumor suppressors, high levels of DNA amplifications, interchromosomial rearrangements, or changes in DNA methylation patterns, the latter being able to find even when the virus is identified in
degradation while pRb inhibits E7. p53 prevents cell growth when DNA is damaged by activating apoptosis and p21, a kinase that blocks the formation of cyclin D / Cdk4 avoiding pRb phosphorylation and thereby prevents release of E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation
kinase that blocks the formation of cyclin D / Cdk4 avoiding pRb phosphorylation and thereby prevents release of E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation. pRb remains bound to E2F while this action phosphorylated preventing activation of proliferation. Therefore, E6 and E7 act
E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation. pRb remains bound to E2F while this action phosphorylated preventing activation of proliferation. Therefore, E6 and E7 act synergistically in triggering cell cycle progression and therefore uncontrolled proliferation by inactivating the p53 and Rb tumor suppressors
in or near oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes and it is for this reason that the integration of the virus can greatly contribute to the development of tumor characteristics. Epstein–Barr virus Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection is associated with nasopharyngeal cancer. Nasopharyngeal cancer occurs endemically in
be measured to screen high-risk populations. Nasopharyngeal cancer has also been associated with consumption of salted fish, which may contain high levels of nitrites.The presence of acid reflux disease (gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD]) or larynx reflux disease can also be a major factor
-risk populations. Nasopharyngeal cancer has also been associated with consumption of salted fish, which may contain high levels of nitrites.The presence of acid reflux disease (gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD]) or larynx reflux disease can also be a major factor. Stomach acids that flow
are more aggressive than others depending upon their location. The stage at which the cancer is diagnosed is also a critical factor in the prognosis of throat cancer. Treatment guidelines recommend routine testing for the presence of HPV for all oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma tumours. Squamous-cell carcinoma Squamous
in both the skin and mucous membranes. It accounts for over 90% of all head and neck cancers, including more than 90% of throat cancer. Squamous cell carcinoma is most likely to appear in males over 40 years of age with a history of heavy alcohol use coupled
and neck cancers, including more than 90% of throat cancer. Squamous cell carcinoma is most likely to appear in males over 40 years of age with a history of heavy alcohol use coupled with smoking.The tumor marker Cyfra 21-1 may be useful in diagnosing squamous cell
(either of intestinal or non-intestinal cell-type).Avoidance of recognised risk factors (as described above) is the single most effective form of prevention. Regular dental examinations may identify pre-cancerous lesions in the oral cavity.When diagnosed early, oral, head and neck cancers
-cancerous lesions in the oral cavity.When diagnosed early, oral, head and neck cancers can be treated more easily and the chances of survival increase tremendously. As of 2017 it was not known if existing HPV vaccines can help prevent head and neck cancer.Improvements in diagnosis
help prevent head and neck cancer.Improvements in diagnosis and local management, as well as targeted therapy, have led to improvements in quality of life and survival for people with head and neck cancer.After a histologic diagnosis has been established and tumor extent determined, the selection of
After a histologic diagnosis has been established and tumor extent determined, the selection of appropriate treatment for a specific cancer depends on a complex array of variables, including tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors,
including tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors, and the person's preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays
tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors, and the person's preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays
preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays of treatment for most head and neck cancers and remain the standard of care in most cases. For small primary cancers without regional metastases (stage
and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays of treatment for most head and neck cancers and remain the standard of care in most cases. For small primary cancers without regional metastases (stage I or II), wide surgical excision alone or curative radiation
there has been an emphasis on the use of various induction or concomitant chemotherapy regimens.Surgery as a treatment is frequently used in most types of head and neck cancer. Usually the goal is to remove the cancerous cells entirely. This can be particularly tricky if the cancer is near
(remove) some or all of the cervical lymph nodes to prevent further spread of the disease.CO2 laser surgery is also another form of treatment. Transoral laser microsurgery allows surgeons to remove tumors from the voice box with no external incisions. It also allows access to tumors that
also allows access to tumors that are not reachable with robotic surgery. During the surgery, surgeon and pathologist work together to assess the adequacy of excision (“margin status”), minimizing the amount of normal tissue removed or damaged. This technique helps give the person as much
damaged. This technique helps give the person as much speech and swallowing function as possible after surgery.Radiation therapy is the most common form of treatment. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and
person as much speech and swallowing function as possible after surgery.Radiation therapy is the most common form of treatment. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in
, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in the treatments of cancers of the head and neck. Most people with head and neck cancer who are treated in the United States and Europe are treated with
therapy using high energy photons. At higher doses, head and neck radiation is associated with thyroid dysfunction and pituitary axis dysfunction. Radiation therapy of head and neck cancers can also cause acute skin reactions of varying levels of severity, which can be treated and managed with topically applied creams
is associated with thyroid dysfunction and pituitary axis dysfunction. Radiation therapy of head and neck cancers can also cause acute skin reactions of varying levels of severity, which can be treated and managed with topically applied creams or specialist films.Chemotherapy in throat cancer is not generally used to cure
establish in other parts of the body. Typical chemotherapy agents are a combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin. Cetuximab is also used in the treatment of throat cancer.Docetaxel-based chemotherapy has shown a very good response in locally advanced head and neck cancer. Docetaxel is the only taxane
, amifostine is often administered intravenously by a chemotherapy clinic prior to IMRT radiotherapy sessions. Amifostine protects the gums and salivary glands from the effects of radiation.There is no evidence that erythropoietin should be routinely given with radiotherapy.Photodynamic therapy may have promise in treating mucosal dysplasia and small
early clinical trials for treatment of advanced head and neck cancer.Targeted therapy, according to the National Cancer Institute, is "a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances, such as monoclonal antibodies, to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells."
pivotal significance, interpretation is difficult since cetuximab-radiotherapy was not directly compared to chemoradiotherapy. The results of ongoing studies to clarify the role of cetuximab in this disease are awaited with interest.Another study evaluated the impact of adding cetuximab to conventional chemotherapy (cisplatin) versus cisplatin alone
cetuximab to conventional chemotherapy (cisplatin) versus cisplatin alone. This study found no improvement in survival or disease-free survival with the addition of cetuximab to the conventional chemotherapy.However, another study which completed in March 2007 found that there was an improvement in survival.A 2010
.However, another study which completed in March 2007 found that there was an improvement in survival.A 2010 review concluded that the combination of cetuximab and platin/5-fluorouracil should be considered the current standard first-line regimen.Gendicine is a gene therapy that employs an adenovirus to
gene therapy that employs an adenovirus to deliver the tumor suppressor gene p53 to cells. It was approved in China in 2003 for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.The mutational profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they
gene p53 to cells. It was approved in China in 2003 for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.The mutational profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment
profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment that activates the immune system to fight cancer. One type of immunotherapy, immune checkpoint blockade, binds to and blocks inhibitory signals on
further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment that activates the immune system to fight cancer. One type of immunotherapy, immune checkpoint blockade, binds to and blocks inhibitory signals on immune cells to release their anti-cancer activities.In 2016,
inhibitory signals on immune cells to release their anti-cancer activities.In 2016, the FDA granted accelerated approval to pembrolizumab for the treatment of people with recurrent or metastatic HNSCC with disease progression on or after platinum-containing chemotherapy. Later that year, the FDA approved nivolumab for
people with head and neck cancer may experience the following symptoms and treatment side effects:Programs to support the emotional and social well-being of people who have been diagnosed with head and neck cancer may be offered. There is no clear evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions or
neck cancer may be offered. There is no clear evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions or any particular type of psychosocial program or length of time that is the most helpful for those with head and neck cancer.Although early-stage head and neck cancers (especially laryngeal and
cancer.Although early-stage head and neck cancers (especially laryngeal and oral cavity) have high cure rates, up to 50% of people with head and neck cancer present with advanced disease.Cure rates decrease in locally advanced cases, whose probability of cure is inversely related
up to 50% of people with head and neck cancer present with advanced disease.Cure rates decrease in locally advanced cases, whose probability of cure is inversely related to tumor size and even more so to the extent of regional node involvement. (citation needed). HPV-
and neck squamous-cell cancers. These staging systems attempt to standardize clinical trial criteria for research studies, and attempt to define prognostic categories of disease. Squamous cell cancers of the head and neck are staged according to the TNM classification system, where T is the size and configuration
are staged according to the TNM classification system, where T is the size and configuration of the tumor, N is the presence or absence of lymph node metastases, and M is the presence or absence of distant metastases. The T, N, and M characteristics are combined to
produce a “stage” of the cancer, from I to IVB.Survival advantages provided by new treatment modalities have been undermined by the significant percentage of people cured of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) who subsequently develop second primary tumors. The incidence of second primary tumors ranges
, called field cancerization.Many people with head and neck cancer are also not able to eat sufficiently. A tumor may impair a person's ability to swallow and eat, and throat cancer may affect the digestive system. The difficulty in swallowing can lead to a person to choke
throat cancer may affect the digestive system. The difficulty in swallowing can lead to a person to choke on their food in the early stages of digestion and interfere with the food's smooth travels down into the esophagus and beyond.The treatments for throat cancer can also be harmful to
vomiting can lead to an electrolyte imbalance which has serious consequences for the proper functioning of the heart. Frequent vomiting can also upset the balance of stomach acids which has a negative impact on the digestive system, especially the lining of the stomach and esophagus.Enteral feeding, a method
on the digestive system, especially the lining of the stomach and esophagus.Enteral feeding, a method that adds nutrients directly into a person's stomach using a nasogastric feeding tube or a gastrostomy tube, may be necessary for some people. Further research is required to determine the most
If the throat cancer is near the bottom of the throat, it has a high likelihood of spreading to the lungs and interfering with the person's ability to breathe; this is even more likely if the person is a smoker, because they are highly susceptible to lung cancer.Cancer
the throat cancer is near the bottom of the throat, it has a high likelihood of spreading to the lungs and interfering with the person's ability to breathe; this is even more likely if the person is a smoker, because they are highly susceptible to lung cancer.Cancer
decreased ability or inability to eat, speak or effectively communicate. Physical appearance is often altered by both the cancer itself or as a consequence of treatment side effects. Psychological distress may occur and feelings such as uncertainty and fear may arise. Some people may also have a changed physical
Experience Increased Caregiver Distress Unique to care for Head and Neck Cancer PatientsMultiple studies have shown caregivers for head and neck cancer patients show higher rates of distress and poorer mental health compared to both the general population as well as those caring for non-head-and-neck cancer patients
will encounter during the treatment and recovery phase for this unique patient population, which span both technical and emotional support. Of note, caregivers of patient's who report lower quality of life, demonstrate increased burden and fatigue that extents beyond the treatment phase.Examples of technically difficult caregiver
phase for this unique patient population, which span both technical and emotional support. Of note, caregivers of patient's who report lower quality of life, demonstrate increased burden and fatigue that extents beyond the treatment phase.Examples of technically difficult caregiver duties include: tube feeding, oral
throat cancer can throw the nervous system into chaos, making it unable to properly regulate and control the body.The number of new cases of head and neck cancers in the United States was 40,490 in 2006, accounting for about 3% of adult malignancies. A total of 11,170
in the Far East. In Southeast China and Taiwan, head and neck cancer, specifically nasopharyngeal cancer, is the most-common cause of death in young men.In 2008, there were 22,900 cases of oral cavity cancer, 12,250 cases of laryngeal cancer, and 12,410 cases
cases of pharyngeal cancer in the United States.In 2002, 7,400 Americans were projected to die of these cancers.More than 70% of throat cancers are at an advanced stage when discovered.Men are 89% more likely than women to be diagnosed with, and are almost
and are almost twice as likely to die of these cancers.African Americans are disproportionately affected by head and neck cancer, with younger ages of incidence, increased mortality, and more advanced disease at presentation. Laryngeal cancer incidence is higher in African Americans relative to white, Asian,
most common cancer type within this disease is adenocarcinoma; in the largest series of 3,051 cases as reported by Stewart et al. 88% of cases fell into this category. According to their study, half of the cases were poorly differentiated, 89% unilateral, and the distribution
tube cancer may be detected by chance during pelvic surgery.International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging is done at the time of surgery:Stage 0  :Carcinoma in situStage I  :Growth limited to fallopian tubesStage II :Growth involving one or both fallopian tubes
. Also, peritoneal washings are taken, the omentum is removed, and pelvic and paraaortic lymph nodes are sampled. Staging at the time of surgery and pathological findings will determine further steps. In advanced cases when the cancer has spread to other organs and cannot be completely removed


imaging (MRI) are used to diagnose or treat diseases. Interventional radiology is the performance of usually minimally invasive medical procedures with the guidance of imaging technologies such as those mentioned above.The modern practice of radiology involves several different healthcare professions working as a team. The radiologist is
Interventional radiology is the performance of usually minimally invasive medical procedures with the guidance of imaging technologies such as those mentioned above.The modern practice of radiology involves several different healthcare professions working as a team. The radiologist is a medical doctor who has completed the appropriate post-graduate training
physicians by means of a report or verbally, and uses imaging to perform minimally invasive medical procedures. The nurse is involved in the care of patients before and after imaging or procedures, including administration of medications, monitoring of vital signs and monitoring of sedated patients. The radiographer,
imaging to perform minimally invasive medical procedures. The nurse is involved in the care of patients before and after imaging or procedures, including administration of medications, monitoring of vital signs and monitoring of sedated patients. The radiographer, also known as a "radiologic technologist" in some countries
is a specially trained healthcare professional that uses sophisticated technology and positioning techniques to produce medical images for the radiologist to interpret. Depending on the individual's training and country of practice, the radiographer may specialize in one of the above-mentioned imaging modalities or have expanded roles in image reporting
a specially trained healthcare professional that uses sophisticated technology and positioning techniques to produce medical images for the radiologist to interpret. Depending on the individual's training and country of practice, the radiographer may specialize in one of the above-mentioned imaging modalities or have expanded roles in image reporting
professional that uses sophisticated technology and positioning techniques to produce medical images for the radiologist to interpret. Depending on the individual's training and country of practice, the radiographer may specialize in one of the above-mentioned imaging modalities or have expanded roles in image reporting.Radiographs (originally
one of the above-mentioned imaging modalities or have expanded roles in image reporting.Radiographs (originally called roentgenographs, named after the discoverer of X-rays, Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen) are produced by transmitting X-rays through a patient.  The X-rays are projected
and received the first Nobel Prize in Physics for their discovery in 1901.In film-screen radiography, an X-ray tube generates a beam of X-rays, which is aimed at the patient. The X-rays that pass through the patient are filtered through a device called
called a grid or X-ray filter, to reduce scatter, and strike an undeveloped film, which is held tightly to a screen of light-emitting phosphors in a light-tight cassette. The film is then developed chemically and an image appears on the film. Film
slot-scanning system, a linear sensor vertically scans the patient.Plain radiography was the only imaging modality available during the first 50 years of radiology. Due to its availability, speed, and lower costs compared to other modalities, radiography is often the first-line test of
of radiology. Due to its availability, speed, and lower costs compared to other modalities, radiography is often the first-line test of choice in radiologic diagnosis. Also despite the large amount of data in CT scans, MR scans and other digital-based imaging, there
lower costs compared to other modalities, radiography is often the first-line test of choice in radiologic diagnosis. Also despite the large amount of data in CT scans, MR scans and other digital-based imaging, there are many disease entities in which the classic diagnosis is obtained
other digital-based imaging, there are many disease entities in which the classic diagnosis is obtained by plain radiographs. Examples include various types of arthritis and pneumonia, bone tumors (especially benign bone tumors), fractures, congenital skeletal anomalies, and certain kidney stones.Mammography and
two applications of low energy projectional radiography, used for the evaluation for breast cancer and osteoporosis, respectively.Fluoroscopy and angiography are special applications of X-ray imaging, in which a fluorescent screen and image intensifier tube is connected to a closed-circuit television system. This allows
, in which a fluorescent screen and image intensifier tube is connected to a closed-circuit television system. This allows real-time imaging of structures in motion or augmented with a radiocontrast agent. Radiocontrast agents are usually administered by swallowing or injecting into the body of the patient to
acquired in the axial plane, with coronal and sagittal images produced by computer reconstruction. Radiocontrast agents are often used with CT for enhanced delineation of anatomy. Although radiographs provide higher spatial resolution, CT can detect more subtle variations in attenuation of X-rays (higher contrast resolution)
are often used with CT for enhanced delineation of anatomy. Although radiographs provide higher spatial resolution, CT can detect more subtle variations in attenuation of X-rays (higher contrast resolution). CT exposes the patient to significantly more ionizing radiation than a radiograph.Spiral multidetector CT uses
in the early 1970s revolutionized diagnostic radiology by providing Clinicians with images of real three-dimensional anatomic structures. CT scanning has become the test of choice in diagnosing some urgent and emergent conditions, such as cerebral hemorrhage, pulmonary embolism (clots in the arteries of the lungs),
but the quality of the images obtained using ultrasound is highly dependent on the skill of the person (ultrasonographer) performing the exam and the patient's body size. Examinations of larger, overweight patients may have a decrease in image quality as their subcutaneous fat absorbs more of the sound waves
the quality of the images obtained using ultrasound is highly dependent on the skill of the person (ultrasonographer) performing the exam and the patient's body size. Examinations of larger, overweight patients may have a decrease in image quality as their subcutaneous fat absorbs more of the sound waves
absorbs more of the sound waves. This results in fewer sound waves penetrating to organs and reflecting back to the transducer, resulting in loss of information and a poorer quality image. Ultrasound is also limited by its inability to image through air pockets (lungs, bowel loops) or
images (unlike radiography, and CT scans), they are generally considered safer and are therefore more common in obstetrical imaging. The progression of pregnancies can be thoroughly evaluated with less concern about damage from the techniques employed, allowing early detection and diagnosis of many fetal anomalies. Growth
uses strong magnetic fields to align atomic nuclei (usually hydrogen protons) within body tissues, then uses a radio signal to disturb the axis of rotation of these nuclei and observes the radio frequency signal generated as the nuclei return to their baseline states.  The radio signals are collected
as the nuclei return to their baseline states.  The radio signals are collected by small antennae, called coils, placed near the area of interest. An advantage of MRI is its ability to produce images in axial, coronal, sagittal and multiple oblique planes with equal ease.
hardware, MRI has become an important tool in musculoskeletal radiology and neuroradiology.One disadvantage is the patient has to hold still for long periods of time in a noisy, cramped space while the imaging is performed. Claustrophobia (fear of closed spaces) severe enough to terminate the MRI
the imaging is performed. Claustrophobia (fear of closed spaces) severe enough to terminate the MRI exam is reported in up to 5% of patients. Recent improvements in magnet design including stronger magnetic fields (3 teslas), shortening exam times, wider, shorter magnet bores and
Areas of potential advancement include functional imaging, cardiovascular MRI, and MRI-guided therapy.Nuclear medicine imaging involves the administration into the patient of radiopharmaceuticals consisting of substances with affinity for certain body tissues labeled with radioactive tracer. The most commonly used tracers are technetium-99m, iodine-123,
PET and CT. PET/MRI fusion, largely practiced in academic and research settings, could potentially play a crucial role in fine detail of brain imaging, breast cancer screening, and small joint imaging of the foot. The technology recently blossomed after passing the technical hurdle of altered
imaging of the foot. The technology recently blossomed after passing the technical hurdle of altered positron movement in strong magnetic field thus affecting the resolution of PET images and attenuation correction.Interventional radiology (IR or sometimes VIR for vascular and interventional radiology) is a subspecialty of radiology in which
affecting the resolution of PET images and attenuation correction.Interventional radiology (IR or sometimes VIR for vascular and interventional radiology) is a subspecialty of radiology in which minimally invasive procedures are performed using image guidance. Some of these procedures are done for purely diagnostic purposes (e.g., angiogram
image only contains the time-dependent differences between the two examined radiographs. The advantage of this technique is the precise determination of the dynamics of density changes and the place of their occurrence. However, beforehand the geometrical adjustment and general alignment of optical density should be done [2].Another
where bio-materials are implanted into the bone for the purpose of guided bone regeneration. They take an intakt bone image sample (region of interest, ROI, reference site) and a sample of the implantation site (second ROI, test site) can be assessed numerically/
, test site) can be assessed numerically/objectively to what extent the implantation site imitates a healthy bone and how advanced is the process of bone regeneration [6] [7]. It is also possible to check whether the bone healing process is influenced by some systemic factors
to another for interpretation by an appropriately trained professional, usually a radiologist or reporting radiographer. It is most often used to allow rapid interpretation of emergency room, ICU and other emergent examinations after hours of usual operation, at night and on weekends. In these cases, the images
-quality display screen that has been tested and cleared for clinical purposes. Reports are then transmitted to the requesting clinician.The major advantage of teleradiology is the ability to use different time zones to provide real-time emergency radiology services around-the-clock. The disadvantages include
the referrer and the reporting Clinician, and the inability to cover for procedures requiring an onsite reporting Clinician. Laws and regulations concerning the use of teleradiology vary among the states, with some requiring a license to practice medicine in the state sending the radiologic exam. In the U.S.,
, some states require the teleradiology report to be preliminary with the official report issued by a hospital staff radiologist. Lastly, the major benefit of teleradiology is that it can be automated with modern machine learning techniques.The benefits of artificial intelligence include efficiency, accuracy, and the ability
Diagnostic radiologists must complete prerequisite undergraduate education, four years of medical school to earn a medical degree (D.O. or M.D.), one year of internship, and four years of residency training. After residency, radiologists may pursue one or two years of additional specialty fellowship training.The
education, four years of medical school to earn a medical degree (D.O. or M.D.), one year of internship, and four years of residency training. After residency, radiologists may pursue one or two years of additional specialty fellowship training.The American Board of Radiology (ABR
and interventional radiology. "Board Certification" in diagnostic radiology requires successful completion of two examinations. The Core Exam is given after 36 months of residency. This computer-based examination is given twice a year in Chicago and Tucson. It encompasses 18 categories. A pass of all
.Certification may also be obtained from the American Osteopathic Board of Radiology (AOBR) and the American Board of Physician Specialties.Following completion of residency training, radiologists may either begin practicing as a general diagnostic radiologist or enter into subspecialty training programs known as fellowships. Examples of subspeciality
completion of residency training, radiologists may either begin practicing as a general diagnostic radiologist or enter into subspecialty training programs known as fellowships. Examples of subspeciality training in radiology include abdominal imaging, thoracic imaging, cross-sectional/ultrasound, MRI, musculoskeletal imaging, interventional radiology, neuroradiology
MRI, musculoskeletal imaging, interventional radiology, neuroradiology, interventional neuroradiology, paediatric radiology, nuclear medicine, emergency radiology, breast imaging and women's imaging. Fellowship training programs in radiology are usually one or two years in length.Some medical schools in the US have started to incorporate
for radiographers vary by country, but many radiographers now are required to hold a degree.Veterinary radiologists are veterinarians who specialize in the use of X-rays, ultrasound, MRI and nuclear medicine for diagnostic imaging or treatment of disease in animals. They are certified in either diagnostic
.Veterinary radiologists are veterinarians who specialize in the use of X-rays, ultrasound, MRI and nuclear medicine for diagnostic imaging or treatment of disease in animals. They are certified in either diagnostic radiology or radiation oncology by the American College of Veterinary Radiology.Radiology is an extremely
radiation oncology by the American College of Veterinary Radiology.Radiology is an extremely competitive speciality in the UK, attracting applicants from a broad range of backgrounds. Applicants are welcomed directly from the foundation programme, as well as those who have completed higher training. Recruitment and selection into training
During this time, doctors rotate into different subspecialities, such as paediatrics, musculoskeletal or neuroradiology, and breast imaging. During the first year of training, radiology trainees are expected to pass the first part of the Fellowship of the Royal College of Radiologists (FRCR) exam. This
allows them to complete the FRCR by completing part 2B, which includes rapid reporting, and a long case discussion.After achieving a certificate of completion of training (CCT), many fellowship posts exist in specialities such as neurointervention and vascular intervention, which would allow the ioctor to
to complete the FRCR by completing part 2B, which includes rapid reporting, and a long case discussion.After achieving a certificate of completion of training (CCT), many fellowship posts exist in specialities such as neurointervention and vascular intervention, which would allow the ioctor to work as
training and education in the UK. Annual meetings are held by which trainees across the country are encouraged to attend.Currently, a shortage of radiologists in the UK has created opportunities in all specialities, and with the increased reliance on imaging, demand is expected to increase in the
trained to undertake many of these opportunities in order to help meet demand. Radiographers often may control a "list" of a particular set of procedures after being approved locally and signed off by a consultant radiologist. Similarly, radiographers may simply operate a list for a radiologist or other
then they are acting as the operator and practitioner under the Ionising Radiation (Medical Exposures) Regulations 2000. Radiographers are represented by a variety of bodies; most often this is the Society and College of Radiographers. Collaboration with nurses is also common, where a list may be jointly
in 2012 and eventually was implemented in 2014. By 2016 the field had determined that the old IR fellowships would be terminated by 2020.A handful of programs have offered interventional radiology fellowships that focus on training in the treatment of children. Europe In Europe the field followed its own pathway;
determined that the old IR fellowships would be terminated by 2020.A handful of programs have offered interventional radiology fellowships that focus on training in the treatment of children. Europe In Europe the field followed its own pathway; for example in Germany the parallel interventional society began to break free of the
science of preventing people and the environment from suffering harmful effects from ionizing radiationRadiosensitivity: measure of the susceptibility of organic tissues to the harmful effects of radiationX-ray image intensifier: equipment that uses x-rays to produce an image feed displayed on a TV screenInternational Day of Radiology:
However, there is a deficiency that is compensated for by the perpendicular plate of the palatine bone, the medial pterygoid plate, the labyrinth of ethmoid and the inferior concha.  The paranasal sinuses are connected to the nasal cavity through small orifices called ostia. Most of these ostia
the roof of each nasal cavity and the medial side of each middle turbinate.  Histological sections appear yellowish-brown due to the presence of lipofuscin pigments.  Olfactory mucosal cell types include bipolar neurons, supporting (sustentacular) cells, basal cells, and Bowman's glands.
, a branch of the facial artery, which supplies the vestibule of the nasal cavity.Innervation of the nasal cavity responsible for the sense of smell is via the olfactory nerve, which sends microscopic fibers from the olfactory bulb through the cribriform plate to reach the top of the nasal
V2)The nasal cavity is innervated by autonomic fibers. Sympathetic innervation to the blood vessels of the mucosa causes them to constrict, while the control of secretion by the mucous glands is carried on postganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers originating from the facial nerve.The two nasal cavities condition the air to
by the nasal conchae (also known as turbinates), the air passing through the nasal cavity is warmed or cooled to within 1 degree of body temperature. In addition, the air is humidified, and dust and other particulate matter is removed by nasal hair in the nostrils.
dust and other particulate matter is removed by nasal hair in the nostrils. The entire mucosa of the nasal cavity is covered by a blanket of mucus, which lies superficial to the microscopic cilia and also filters inspired air. The cilia of the respiratory epithelium move the secreted mucus and
particulate matter posteriorly towards the pharynx where it passes into the esophagus and is digested in the stomach. The nasal cavity also houses the sense of smell and contributes greatly to taste sensation through its posterior communication with the mouth via the choanae.Diseases of the nasal cavity include viral,
is regarded as malignant. The male:female ratio is approximately one.Symptoms may include coughing, an upper respiratory tract infection, shortness of breath, and chest pain.  These symptoms are very non-specific, and can be caused by other types of tumor in the
infection, shortness of breath, and chest pain.  These symptoms are very non-specific, and can be caused by other types of tumor in the lung or mediastinum more generally, and by other conditions.  Imaging (X-ray, CT, MRI) may
-ray, CT, MRI) may be used to determine the presence and precise location of a tumor, but not a specific diagnosis of PPB or other tumor.Doctors are unable to tell if a child has PPB right away, and not upper respiratory tract infection, until
upper respiratory tract infection, until more test are taken and they show that there is no infection. Another symptom is pneumothorax.A number of PPBs have shown trisomy 8 (17 out of 23 cases studied per the PPB registry).  Trisomy 2 and p53 mutations/deletions
tumor, whether the cancer has spread, and the child's overall health. Surgery is the main treatment for PPB. The main goal of surgery is to remove the tumor. If the tumor is too large to be completely removed, or if it's not possible to completely
-exams. However, the American Cancer Society suggests that some men should examine their testicles monthly, especially if they have a family history of cancer, and the American Urological Association recommends monthly testicular self-examinations for all young men.Symptoms may also include one or more of
cancer to spread to other organs, apart from the lungs. If it has, however, the following symptoms may be present:shortness of breath (dyspnea), cough or coughing up blood (hemoptysis) from metastatic spread to the lungsa lump in the neck due to metastases
, cryptorchidism, hypospadias, and poor semen quality make up the syndrome known as testicular dysgenesis syndrome.A major risk factor for the development of testis cancer is cryptorchidism (undescended testicles).  It is generally believed that the presence of a tumor contributes to cryptorchidism;  when
increased risk.  These may reflect endogenous or environmental hormones. Higher rates of testicular cancer in Western nations have been linked to the use of cannabis.Most testicular germ cell tumors have too many chromosomes, and most often they are triploid to tetraploid. An isochromosome 12p (the
Most testicular germ cell tumors have too many chromosomes, and most often they are triploid to tetraploid. An isochromosome 12p (the short arm of chromosome 12 on both sides of the same centromere) is present in about 80% of the testicular cancers, and also the other cancers
of the disease is evaluated by CT scans, which are used to locate metastases.The differential diagnosis of testicular cancer requires examining the histology of tissue obtained from an inguinal orchiectomy - that is, surgical excision of the entire testis along with attached structures (epididymis and spermatic cord)
performed, as it raises the risk of spreading cancer cells into the scrotum.Inguinal orchiectomy is the preferred method because it lowers the risk of cancer cells escaping. This is because the lymphatic system of the scrotum, through which white blood cells (and, potentially, cancer cells
high levels of chorionic gonadotropin; however, the first sign of testicular cancer is usually a painless lump. Note that only about 25% of seminomas have elevated chorionic gonadotropin, so a pregnancy test is not very sensitive for making out testicular cancer.The American Academy of Family Physicians
cell tumorMesenchymal tumors of the spermatic cord and testicular adnexaeLipomaLiposarcomaRhabdomyosarcomaAggressive angiomyxomaAngiomyofibroblastoma-like tumor (see Myxoma)FibromatosisFibromaSolitary fibrous tumorOthersSecondary tumors of the testisThe three basic types of treatment are surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy.Surgery is performed by urologists; radiation therapy is administered by radiation oncologists; and chemotherapy
the belt line in the inguinal area.)  In the UK, the procedure is known as a radical orchidectomy.In the case of nonseminomas that appear to be stage I, surgery may be done on the retroperitoneal/paraaortic lymph nodes (in a separate operation) to
, this approach, while standard in many places, especially the United States, is out of favor due to costs and the high level of expertise required to perform successful surgery. Sperm banking is frequently carried out prior to the procedure (as with chemotherapy), as there is
no further surgery is performed unless tests indicate that the cancer has returned. This approach maintains a high cure rate because of the growing accuracy of surveillance techniques.Since testicular cancers can spread, patients are usually offered adjuvant treatment - in the form of chemotherapy or radiotherapy - to kill
rate because of the growing accuracy of surveillance techniques.Since testicular cancers can spread, patients are usually offered adjuvant treatment - in the form of chemotherapy or radiotherapy - to kill any cancerous cells that may exist outside of the affected testicle. The type of adjuvant therapy depends largely on
adjuvant therapy depends largely on the histology of the tumor (i.e. the size and shape of its cells under the microscope) and the stage of progression at the time of surgery (i.e. how far cells have 'escaped' from the testicle, invaded the surrounding tissue, or spread
the histology of the tumor (i.e. the size and shape of its cells under the microscope) and the stage of progression at the time of surgery (i.e. how far cells have 'escaped' from the testicle, invaded the surrounding tissue, or spread to the rest of the
to cure rates of over 95%.Radiation may be used to treat stage II seminoma cancers, or as adjuvant (preventative) therapy in the case of stage I seminomas, to minimize the likelihood that tiny, non-detectable tumors exist and will spread (in the inguinal and para-
masses left behind (stage 2B or more advanced), particularly in the cases of large nonseminomas. Seminoma As an adjuvant treatment, use of chemotherapy as an alternative to radiation therapy in the treatment of seminoma is increasing, because radiation therapy appears to have more significant long-term
particularly in the cases of large nonseminomas. Seminoma As an adjuvant treatment, use of chemotherapy as an alternative to radiation therapy in the treatment of seminoma is increasing, because radiation therapy appears to have more significant long-term side effects (for example, internal scarring, increased risks
(for example, internal scarring, increased risks of secondary malignancies, etc.).  Two doses, or occasionally a single dose of carboplatin, typically delivered three weeks apart, is proving to be a successful adjuvant treatment, with recurrence rates in the same ranges as those
weeks apart, is proving to be a successful adjuvant treatment, with recurrence rates in the same ranges as those of radiotherapy. The concept of carboplatin as a single-dose therapy was developed by Tim Oliver, Professor of Medical Oncology at Barts and The London School of Medicine and
treatment.Treatment of testicular cancer is one of the success stories of modern medicine, with sustained response to treatment in more than 90% of cases, regardless of stage. In 2011 overall cure rates of more than 95% were reported, and 80% for metastatic disease—
to the chemotherapy drug cisplatin. In the United States, when the disease is treated while it is still localized, more than 99% of people survive 5 years.For many patients with stage I cancer, adjuvant (preventative) therapy following surgery may not be appropriate and patients
) therapy following surgery may not be appropriate and patients will undergo surveillance instead. The form this surveillance takes, e.g. the type and frequency of investigations and the length time it should continue, will depend on the type of cancer (non-seminoma or seminoma), but the
The form this surveillance takes, e.g. the type and frequency of investigations and the length time it should continue, will depend on the type of cancer (non-seminoma or seminoma), but the aim is to avoid unnecessary treatments in the many patients who are cured by their
are detected early and cured. This approach ensures that chemotherapy and or radiotherapy is only given to the patients that need it. The number of patients ultimately cured is the same using surveillance as post-operative “adjuvant” treatments, but the patients have to be prepared to follow
is the same using surveillance as post-operative “adjuvant” treatments, but the patients have to be prepared to follow a prolonged series of visits and tests.For both non-seminomas and seminomas, surveillance tests generally include physical examination, blood tests for tumor markers, chest
for tumor markers, chest x-rays and CT scanning.  However, the requirements of a surveillance program differ according to the type of disease since, for seminoma patients, relapses can occur later and blood tests are not as good at indicating relapse.CT scans are performed
increasingly preferred for the lungs as they give sufficient detail combined with a lower false-positive rate and significantly smaller radiation dose than CT.The frequency of CT scans during surveillance should ensure that relapses are detected at an early stage while minimizing the radiation exposure.For patients treated for stage I
patients treated for stage I seminoma who choose surveillance rather than undergoing adjuvant therapy, there have been no randomized trials to determine the optimum frequency of scans and visits, and the schedules vary very widely across the world, and within individual countries. In the UK there is an ongoing
be preferable to CT.For more advanced stages of testicular cancer, and for those cases in which radiation therapy or chemotherapy was administered, the extent of monitoring (tests) after treatment will vary on the basis of the circumstances, but normally should be done for five years in uncomplicated cases
on the basis of the circumstances, but normally should be done for five years in uncomplicated cases and for longer in those with higher risks of relapse.A man with one remaining testis may maintain fertile.  However, sperm banking may be appropriate for men who still plan to
the U.S. and Europe, and is uncommon in Asia and Africa.  Worldwide incidence has doubled since the 1960s, with the highest rates of prevalence in Scandinavia, Germany, and New Zealand.Although testicular cancer is most common among men aged 15–40 years, it has three peaks
roughly 1 in 200 (0.5%). It is the 16th most common cancer in men. It accounts for less than 1% of cancer deaths in men (around 60 men died in 2012).Testicular tumors occur also in animals.  In horses, these include interstitial cell tumors
cell tumors and teratomas.  Typically, the former are found in older stallions (affected stallions may become extremely vicious, suggesting excessive production of androgen), and the latter are found in young horses and are large.Ball Checker, self-exam app from the Testicular Cancer

, itching, and constantly feeling tired. The enlarged lymph nodes are usually painless. The sweats are most common at night.Many subtypes of lymphomas are known. The two main categories of lymphomas are the non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) (90% of cases) and
enlarged lymph nodes are usually painless. The sweats are most common at night.Many subtypes of lymphomas are known. The two main categories of lymphomas are the non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) (90% of cases) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) (10%)
.Many subtypes of lymphomas are known. The two main categories of lymphomas are the non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) (90% of cases) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) (10%). The World Health Organization (WHO) includes two other categories as types
cases) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) (10%). The World Health Organization (WHO) includes two other categories as types of lymphoma - multiple myeloma and immunoproliferative diseases. Lymphomas and leukemias are a part of the broader group of tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues
) includes two other categories as types of lymphoma - multiple myeloma and immunoproliferative diseases. Lymphomas and leukemias are a part of the broader group of tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues.Risk factors for Hodgkin lymphoma include infection with Epstein–Barr virus and a history of the disease
following: chemotherapy, radiation therapy, proton therapy, targeted therapy, and surgery. In some non-Hodgkin lymphomas, an increased amount of protein produced by the lymphoma cells causes the blood to become so thick that plasmapheresis is performed to remove the protein. Watchful waiting may be
symptoms; if the symptoms are persistent, an evaluation to determine their cause, including possible lymphoma, should be undertaken.Lymphadenopathy or swelling of lymph nodes, is the primary presentation in lymphoma. It is generally painless.B symptoms (systemic symptoms) – can be associated with
both Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. They consist of:FeverNight sweatsWeight lossOther symptoms:Anemia, bleeding, increase susceptibility to infectionsLoss of appetite or anorexiaFatigueRespiratory distress or dyspneaItchingAsymptomatic soft swelling, which may or may not be ulcerated, is primarily seen on the tonsils, buccal mucosa
of a lymph node examined under the microscope. This examination reveals histopathological features that may indicate lymphoma. After lymphoma is diagnosed, a variety of tests may be carried out to look for specific features characteristic of different types of lymphoma. These include:ImmunophenotypingFlow cytometryFluorescence in situ hybridization testingAccording
may indicate lymphoma. After lymphoma is diagnosed, a variety of tests may be carried out to look for specific features characteristic of different types of lymphoma. These include:ImmunophenotypingFlow cytometryFluorescence in situ hybridization testingAccording to the World Health Organization (WHO), lymphoma classification should reflect in which
, often around the brain in the meninges, known as lymphomatous meningitis (LM). Hodgkin lymphoma Hodgkin lymphoma accounts for about 15% of lymphomas. It differs from other forms of lymphomas in its prognosis and several pathological characteristics. A division into Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas
, known as lymphomatous meningitis (LM). Hodgkin lymphoma Hodgkin lymphoma accounts for about 15% of lymphomas. It differs from other forms of lymphomas in its prognosis and several pathological characteristics. A division into Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas is used in several of the older classification
and non-Hodgkin lymphomas is used in several of the older classification systems. A Hodgkin lymphoma is marked by the presence of a type of cell called the Reed–Sternberg cell. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas Non-Hodgkin lymphomas, which are defined as being all lymphomas except Hodgkin
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas, which are defined as being all lymphomas except Hodgkin lymphoma, are more common than Hodgkin lymphoma. A wide variety of lymphomas are in this class, and the causes, the types of cells involved, and the prognoses vary by type. The number of
Hodgkin lymphoma, are more common than Hodgkin lymphoma. A wide variety of lymphomas are in this class, and the causes, the types of cells involved, and the prognoses vary by type. The number of cases per year of non-Hodgkin lymphoma increases with age. It
of lymphomas are in this class, and the causes, the types of cells involved, and the prognoses vary by type. The number of cases per year of non-Hodgkin lymphoma increases with age. It is further divided into several subtypes. Epstein-Barr virus-associated
-positive Hodgkin lymphomas, the World Health Organization (2016) includes the following lymphomas, when associated with EBV infection, in this group of diseases: Burkitt lymphoma; large B cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified; diffuse large B cell lymphoma associated with chronic inflammation; fibrin-
type; peripheral T cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified; angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma; follicular T cell lymphoma; and systemic T cell lymphoma of childhood. WHO classification The WHO classification, published in 2001 and updated in 2008, is based upon the foundations laid within the "revised
, although it is recognized as being a tumor, albeit markedly abnormal, of lymphocytes of mature B cell lineage.Of the many forms of lymphoma, some are categorized as indolent (e.g. small lymphocytic lymphoma), compatible with a long life even without treatment, whereas other forms
Staging is reported as a grade between I (confined) and IV (spread). The stage of a lymphoma helps predict a patient's prognosis and is used to help select the appropriate therapy.The Ann Arbor staging system is routinely used for staging of both HL and NHL
of both HL and NHL. In this staging system, I represents localized disease contained within a lymph node group, II represents the presence of lymphoma in two or more lymph nodes groups, III represents spread of the lymphoma to lymph nodes groups on both sides of the diaphragm,
example S for the spleen and H for the liver. Extra-lymphatic involvement is expressed with the letter E. In addition, the presence of B symptoms (one or more of the following: unintentional loss of 10% body weight in the last 6 months, night sweats,
other lymphoma treatments.Prognoses and treatments are different for HL and between all the different forms of NHL, and also depend on the grade of tumour, referring to how quickly a cancer replicates. Paradoxically, high-grade lymphomas are more readily treated and have better prognoses: Burkitt
Many low-grade lymphomas remain indolent (growing slowly or not at all) for many years – sometimes, for the rest of the person's life. With an indolent lymphoma, such as follicular lymphoma, watchful waiting is often the initial course of action, because monitoring is less
low-grade lymphomas remain indolent (growing slowly or not at all) for many years – sometimes, for the rest of the person's life. With an indolent lymphoma, such as follicular lymphoma, watchful waiting is often the initial course of action, because monitoring is less
for the rest of the person's life. With an indolent lymphoma, such as follicular lymphoma, watchful waiting is often the initial course of action, because monitoring is less risky and less harmful than early treatment.If a low-grade lymphoma becomes symptomatic, radiotherapy or chemotherapy
monitoring is less risky and less harmful than early treatment.If a low-grade lymphoma becomes symptomatic, radiotherapy or chemotherapy are the treatments of choice.  Although these treatments do not permanently cure the lymphoma, they can alleviate the symptoms, particularly painful lymphadenopathy. People with these
.  Although these treatments do not permanently cure the lymphoma, they can alleviate the symptoms, particularly painful lymphadenopathy. People with these types of lymphoma can live near-normal lifespans, even though the disease is technically incurable.Some centers advocate the use of single agent rituximab in
significant distress and anxiety in some people. It has been called "watch and worry".Treatment of some other, more aggressive, forms of lymphoma can result in a cure in the majority of cases, but the prognosis for people with a poor response to therapy is worse.
been called "watch and worry".Treatment of some other, more aggressive, forms of lymphoma can result in a cure in the majority of cases, but the prognosis for people with a poor response to therapy is worse. Treatment for these types of lymphoma typically consists of aggressive
a cure in the majority of cases, but the prognosis for people with a poor response to therapy is worse. Treatment for these types of lymphoma typically consists of aggressive chemotherapy, including the CHOP or R-CHOP regimen. A number of people are cured with first-line
is worse. Treatment for these types of lymphoma typically consists of aggressive chemotherapy, including the CHOP or R-CHOP regimen. A number of people are cured with first-line chemotherapy. Most relapses occur within the first two years, and the relapse risk drops significantly thereafter.
drops significantly thereafter. For people who relapse, high-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation is a proven approach.The treatment of side effects is also important as they can occur due to the chemotherapy or the stem cell transplantation. It was evaluated whether mesenchymal stromal cells
occur due to the chemotherapy or the stem cell transplantation. It was evaluated whether mesenchymal stromal cells can be used for the treatment and prophylaxis of graft-versus-host diseases. The evidence is very uncertain about the therapeutic effect of mesenchymal stromal cells to treat graft-versus-
used for prophylactic reason. Moreover, it was seen that platelet transfusions for people undergoing a chemotherapy or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the
seen that platelet transfusions for people undergoing a chemotherapy or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet
or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet transfusions depending on the way they were used (
number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet transfusions depending on the way they were used (therapeutic, depending on a threshold, different dose schedules or prophylactic).Four chimeric antigen receptor CAR
use of ABVD or BEACOPP. Briefly, both regimens are effective, but BEACOPP is associated with more toxicity. Encouragingly, a significant number of people who relapse after ABVD can still be salvaged by stem cell transplant.Scientists evaluated whether positron-emission-tomography scans between the chemotherapy
lymphoma. The evidence is very uncertain about the effect of Nivolumab for patients with a Hodgkin's lymphoma on the overall survival, the quality of life, the survival without a progression, the response rate (=complete disappear) and grade 3 or 4 serious adverse events.Palliative care
multiple national cancer treatment guidelines as an accompaniment to curative treatments for people suffering from lymphoma. It is used to address both the direct symptoms of lymphoma and many unwanted side effects that arise from treatments. Palliative care can be especially helpful for children who develop lymphoma, helping both children
exercises to the standard treatment for adult patients with haematologicl malignancies like lymphomas may result in little to no difference in the mortality, the quality of life and the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression. Furthermore, aerobic physical exercises probably reduce fatigue.
National Institutes of Health, lymphomas account for about 5%, and Hodgkin lymphoma in particular accounts for less than 1% of all cases of cancer in the United States.Because the whole system is part of the body's immune system, people with a weakened immune system such
's immune system, people with a weakened immune system such as from HIV infection or from certain drugs or medication also have a higher number of cases of lymphoma.Thomas Hodgkin published the first description of lymphoma in 1832, specifically of the form named after him. Since then,
system, people with a weakened immune system such as from HIV infection or from certain drugs or medication also have a higher number of cases of lymphoma.Thomas Hodgkin published the first description of lymphoma in 1832, specifically of the form named after him. Since then, many other
as from HIV infection or from certain drugs or medication also have a higher number of cases of lymphoma.Thomas Hodgkin published the first description of lymphoma in 1832, specifically of the form named after him. Since then, many other forms of lymphoma have been described.The term
.Thomas Hodgkin published the first description of lymphoma in 1832, specifically of the form named after him. Since then, many other forms of lymphoma have been described.The term "lymphoma" is from Latin lympha ("water") and from Greek -oma ("morbid
The term "lymphoma" is from Latin lympha ("water") and from Greek -oma ("morbid growth, tumor").The two types of lymphoma research are clinical or translational research and basic research. Clinical/translational research focuses on studying the disease in a defined and generally immediately
the disease in a defined and generally immediately applicable way, such as testing a new drug in people. Studies may focus on effective means of treatment, better ways of treating the disease, improving the quality of life for people, or appropriate care in remission or after cures.
testing a new drug in people. Studies may focus on effective means of treatment, better ways of treating the disease, improving the quality of life for people, or appropriate care in remission or after cures. Hundreds of clinical trials are being planned or conducted at any given time
disease progresses. The results from basic research studies are generally less immediately useful to people with the disease, but can improve scientists' understanding of lymphoma and form the foundation for future, more effective treatments.Lymphoma at Curlie
is a cancer that arises from the endometrium (the lining of the uterus or womb). It is the result of the abnormal growth of cells that have the ability to invade or spread to other parts of the body. The first sign is most often vaginal bleeding not associated
symptoms include pain with urination, pain during sexual intercourse, or pelvic pain. Endometrial cancer occurs most commonly after menopause.Approximately 40% of cases are related to obesity. Endometrial cancer is also associated with excessive estrogen exposure, high blood pressure and diabetes. Whereas taking estrogen alone
, taking both estrogen and a progestogen in combination, as in most birth control pills, decreases the risk. Between two and five percent of cases are related to genes inherited from the parents. Endometrial cancer is sometimes loosely referred to as "uterine cancer", although it is
, uterine sarcoma, and trophoblastic disease. The most frequent type of endometrial cancer is endometrioid carcinoma, which accounts for more than 80% of cases. Endometrial cancer is commonly diagnosed by endometrial biopsy or by taking samples during a procedure known as dilation and curettage. A pap smear
is greater than 80%.In 2012, endometrial cancers newly occurred in 320,000 women and caused 76,000 deaths. This makes it the third most common cause of death in cancers which only affect women, behind ovarian and cervical cancer. It is more common in the developed world and is the most
developed world and is the most common cancer of the female reproductive tract in developed countries. Rates of endometrial cancer have risen in a number of countries between the 1980s and 2010. This is believed to be due to the increasing number of elderly people and increasing rates of obesity.
a number of countries between the 1980s and 2010. This is believed to be due to the increasing number of elderly people and increasing rates of obesity.Vaginal bleeding or spotting in women after menopause occurs in 90% of endometrial cancer. Bleeding is especially common with adenocarcinoma, occurring
especially common with adenocarcinoma, occurring in two-thirds of all cases. Abnormal menstrual cycles or extremely long, heavy, or frequent episodes of bleeding in women before menopause may also be a sign of endometrial cancer.Symptoms other than bleeding are not common. Other symptoms include thin
pain, and pus), 10–15% have cancer.Risk factors for endometrial cancer include obesity, diabetes mellitus, breast cancer, use of tamoxifen, never having had a child, late menopause, high levels of estrogen, and increasing age. Immigration studies (migration studies)
endometrial cancer include obesity, diabetes mellitus, breast cancer, use of tamoxifen, never having had a child, late menopause, high levels of estrogen, and increasing age. Immigration studies (migration studies), which examine the change in cancer risk in populations moving between countries with
and increasing age. Immigration studies (migration studies), which examine the change in cancer risk in populations moving between countries with different rates of cancer, show that there is some environmental component to endometrial cancer. These environmental risk factors are not well characterized.Most of the risk
environmental component to endometrial cancer. These environmental risk factors are not well characterized.Most of the risk factors for endometrial cancer involve high levels of estrogens. An estimated 40% of cases are thought to be related to obesity. In obesity, the excess of adipose tissue increases conversion
environmental risk factors are not well characterized.Most of the risk factors for endometrial cancer involve high levels of estrogens. An estimated 40% of cases are thought to be related to obesity. In obesity, the excess of adipose tissue increases conversion of androstenedione into estrone, an estrogen
estrogens. An estimated 40% of cases are thought to be related to obesity. In obesity, the excess of adipose tissue increases conversion of androstenedione into estrone, an estrogen. Higher levels of estrone in the blood causes less or no ovulation and exposes the endometrium to continuously high
to be related to obesity. In obesity, the excess of adipose tissue increases conversion of androstenedione into estrone, an estrogen. Higher levels of estrone in the blood causes less or no ovulation and exposes the endometrium to continuously high levels of estrogens. Obesity also causes less estrogen to
into estrone, an estrogen. Higher levels of estrone in the blood causes less or no ovulation and exposes the endometrium to continuously high levels of estrogens. Obesity also causes less estrogen to be removed from the blood. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), which also causes irregular or
300–400%.Estrogen replacement therapy during menopause when not balanced (or "opposed") with progestin is another risk factor. Higher doses or longer periods of estrogen therapy have higher risks of endometrial cancer. Women of lower weight are at greater risk from unopposed estrogen. A longer period of fertility
periods of estrogen therapy have higher risks of endometrial cancer. Women of lower weight are at greater risk from unopposed estrogen. A longer period of fertility—either from an early first menstrual period or late menopause—is also a risk factor. Unopposed estrogen raises an individual's risk
period of fertility—either from an early first menstrual period or late menopause—is also a risk factor. Unopposed estrogen raises an individual's risk of endometrial cancer by 2–10 fold, depending on weight and length of therapy. In trans men who take testosterone and have not had
—is also a risk factor. Unopposed estrogen raises an individual's risk of endometrial cancer by 2–10 fold, depending on weight and length of therapy. In trans men who take testosterone and have not had a hysterectomy, the conversion of testosterone into estrogen via androstenedione may lead to
2–10 fold, depending on weight and length of therapy. In trans men who take testosterone and have not had a hysterectomy, the conversion of testosterone into estrogen via androstenedione may lead to a higher risk of endometrial cancer.Genetic disorders can also cause endometrial cancer. Overall, hereditary
endometrial cancer, higher than their risk of developing colorectal (bowel) or ovarian cancer. Ovarian and endometrial cancer develop simultaneously in 20% of people. Endometrial cancer nearly always develops before colon cancer, on average, 11 years before. Carcinogenesis in Lynch syndrome comes from a mutation
on average, 11 years before. Carcinogenesis in Lynch syndrome comes from a mutation in MLH1 or MLH2: genes that participate in the process of mismatch repair, which allows a cell to correct mistakes in the DNA. Other genes mutated in Lynch syndrome include MSH2, MSH6, and
and with MSH6, 16%.Women with a family history of endometrial cancer are at higher risk. Two genes most commonly associated with some other women's cancers, BRCA1 and BRCA2, do not cause endometrial cancer. There is an apparent link with these genes but it is attributable to the
have been associated with endometrial cancer and the common variants explain up to 7% of the familial relative risk.Some therapies for other forms of cancer increase the lifetime risk of endometrial cancer, which is a baseline 2–3%. Tamoxifen, a drug used to treat estrogen-positive
2–3%. Tamoxifen, a drug used to treat estrogen-positive breast cancers, has been associated with endometrial cancer in approximately 0.1% of users, particularly older women, but the benefits for survival from tamoxifen generally outweigh the risk of endometrial cancer. A one to two-
particularly older women, but the benefits for survival from tamoxifen generally outweigh the risk of endometrial cancer. A one to two-year course of tamoxifen approximately doubles the risk of endometrial cancer, and a five-year course of therapy quadruples that risk. Raloxifene, a similar drug
endometrial cancer. A one to two-year course of tamoxifen approximately doubles the risk of endometrial cancer, and a five-year course of therapy quadruples that risk. Raloxifene, a similar drug, did not raise the risk of endometrial cancer. Previously having ovarian cancer is a
associated with higher mortality from endometrial cancer. The risk is not negated by regular exercise, though it is lowered.Smoking and the use of progestin are both protective against endometrial cancer. Smoking provides protection by altering the metabolism of estrogen and promoting weight loss and early menopause. This
, though it is lowered.Smoking and the use of progestin are both protective against endometrial cancer. Smoking provides protection by altering the metabolism of estrogen and promoting weight loss and early menopause. This protective effect lasts long after smoking is stopped. Progestin is present in the combined oral
after twelve years. This risk reduction continues for at least fifteen years after contraceptive use has been stopped. Obese women may need higher doses of progestin to be protected. Having had more than five infants (grand multiparity) is also a protective factor, and having at least one
child reduces the risk by 35%. Breastfeeding for more than 18 months reduces risk by 23%. Increased physical activity reduces an individual's risk by 38–46%. There is preliminary evidence that consumption of soy is protective.Endometrial cancer forms when there are errors in normal endometrial
18 months reduces risk by 23%. Increased physical activity reduces an individual's risk by 38–46%. There is preliminary evidence that consumption of soy is protective.Endometrial cancer forms when there are errors in normal endometrial cell growth. Usually, when cells grow old or get damaged
new cells form unneeded, and old or damaged cells do not die as they should. The buildup of extra cells often forms a mass of tissue called a growth or tumor. These abnormal cancer cells have many genetic abnormalities that cause them to grow excessively.In 10–20% of
mTOR pathway, which causes cell growth. The p53 pathway can either be suppressed or highly activated in endometrial cancer. When a mutant version of p53 is overexpressed, the cancer tends to be particularly aggressive. P53 mutations and chromosome instability are associated with serous carcinomas, which tend to
carcinomas, which tend to resemble ovarian and Fallopian carcinomas. Serous carcinomas are thought to develop from endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma.PTEN and p27 loss of function mutations are associated with a good prognosis, particularly in obese women. The Her2/neu oncogene, which indicates a poor prognosis,
endometrial hyperplasia and therefore Type I endometrial cancer. Endometrial hyperplasia typically occurs after the age of 40. Endometrial glandular dysplasia occurs with an overexpression of p53, and develops into a serous carcinoma.Diagnosis of endometrial cancer is made first by a physical examination, endometrial biopsy, or dilation
examination, endometrial biopsy, or dilation and curettage (removal of endometrial tissue; D&C). This tissue is then examined histologically for characteristics of cancer. If cancer is found, medical imaging may be done to see whether the cancer has spread or invaded tissue.Routine screening of
Pap smear can detect disease that has spread to the cervix. Results from a pelvic examination are frequently normal, especially in the early stages of disease. Changes in the size, shape or consistency of the uterus or its surrounding, supporting structures may exist when the disease is more
endometrial cancer in the United States. In the United Kingdom, both an endometrial biopsy and a transvaginal ultrasound used in conjunction are the standard of care for diagnosing endometrial cancer. The homogeneity of the tissue visible on transvaginal ultrasound can help to indicate whether the thickness is cancerous. Ultrasound
for example endometrial biopsy) must be used in conjunction. Other imaging studies are of limited use. CT scans are used for preoperative imaging of tumors that appear advanced on physical exam or have a high-risk subtype (at high risk of metastasis). They can also be
CT scans are used for preoperative imaging of tumors that appear advanced on physical exam or have a high-risk subtype (at high risk of metastasis). They can also be used to investigate extrapelvic disease. An MRI can be of some use in determining if the cancer has
not indicative of cancer, and is therefore not used, unless in conjunction with a biopsy. Hysteroscopy can be used to confirm a diagnosis of cancer. New evidence shows that D&C has a higher false negative rate than endometrial biopsy.Before treatment is begun, several other investigations are
other investigations are recommended. These include a chest x-ray, liver function tests, kidney function tests, and a test for levels of CA-125, a tumor marker that can be elevated in endometrial cancer.Endometrial cancers may be tumors derived from epithelial cells (carcinomas),
based on clinical features and pathogenesis. The two subtypes are genetically distinct.Type I endometrial carcinomas occur most commonly before and around the time of menopause. In the United States, they are more common in white women, particularly those with a history of endometrial hyperplasia. Type I
, are of the serous or clear cell type, and carry a poorer prognosis. They can appear to be epithelial ovarian cancer on evaluation of symptoms. They tend to present later than Type I tumors and are more aggressive, with a greater risk of relapse and/or metastasis. Endometrioid
epithelial ovarian cancer on evaluation of symptoms. They tend to present later than Type I tumors and are more aggressive, with a greater risk of relapse and/or metastasis. Endometrioid adenocarcinoma In endometrioid adenocarcinoma, the cancer cells grow in patterns reminiscent of normal endometrium, with many new glands formed
. Low-grade endometrioid adenocarcinomas have well differentiated cells, have not invaded the myometrium, and are seen alongside endometrial hyperplasia. The tumor's glands form very close together, without the stromal tissue that normally separates them. Higher-grade endometrioid adenocarcinomas have less well-differentiated cells
, without the stromal tissue that normally separates them. Higher-grade endometrioid adenocarcinomas have less well-differentiated cells, have more solid sheets of tumor cells no longer organized into glands, and are associated with an atrophied endometrium. There are several subtypes of endometrioid adenocarcinoma with similar prognoses
, with 60–90% five-year survival. High-grade undifferentiated endometrial sarcoma (HGUS) has a worse prognosis, with high rates of recurrence and 25% five-year survival. HGUS prognosis is dictated by whether or not the cancer has invaded the arteries and veins.
, while grade III tumors are the most aggressive and likely to recur. Grade II cancers are intermediate between grades I and III in terms of cell differentiation and aggressiveness of disease.The histopathology of endometrial cancers is highly diverse. The most common finding is a well-differentiated endometrioid
are the most aggressive and likely to recur. Grade II cancers are intermediate between grades I and III in terms of cell differentiation and aggressiveness of disease.The histopathology of endometrial cancers is highly diverse. The most common finding is a well-differentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma, which is composed
FIGO staging system is as follows:Myometrial invasion and involvement of the pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes are the most commonly seen patterns of spread. A Stage 0 is sometimes included, in this case it is referred to as "carcinoma in situ". In 26%
intraoperative staging revealed pelvic and distant metastases, making comprehensive surgical staging necessary.						The initial treatment for endometrial cancer is surgery; 90% of women with endometrial cancer are treated with some form of surgery. Surgical treatment typically consists of hysterectomy including a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, which
surgical staging necessary.						The initial treatment for endometrial cancer is surgery; 90% of women with endometrial cancer are treated with some form of surgery. Surgical treatment typically consists of hysterectomy including a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, which is the removal of the uterus, and both ovaries
for all stages of endometrial cancer in the United States, but in the United Kingdom, the lymph nodes are typically only removed with disease of stage II or greater. The topic of lymphadenectomy and what survival benefit it offers in stage I disease is still being debated. In women
United States, but in the United Kingdom, the lymph nodes are typically only removed with disease of stage II or greater. The topic of lymphadenectomy and what survival benefit it offers in stage I disease is still being debated. In women with presumed stage I disease, a 2017
disease is still being debated. In women with presumed stage I disease, a 2017 systematic review found no evidence that lymphadenectomy reduces the risk of death or relapse of cancer when compared with no lymphadenectomy. Women who undergo lymphadenectomy are more likely to experience systemic morbidity related to surgery or
debated. In women with presumed stage I disease, a 2017 systematic review found no evidence that lymphadenectomy reduces the risk of death or relapse of cancer when compared with no lymphadenectomy. Women who undergo lymphadenectomy are more likely to experience systemic morbidity related to surgery or lymphoedema/lymphocyst formation
removal of the uterus via the vagina because it gives the opportunity to examine and obtain washings of the abdominal cavity to detect any further evidence of cancer. Staging of the cancer is done during the surgery.The few contraindications to surgery include inoperable tumor, massive obesity, a particularly
tumor, massive obesity, a particularly high-risk operation, or a desire to preserve fertility. These contraindications happen in about 5–10% of cases. Women who wish to preserve their fertility and have low-grade stage I cancer can be treated with progestins, with or without
cancer does not respond to treatment or until childbearing is done. Uterine perforation may occur during a D&C or an endometrial biopsy. Side effects of surgery to remove endometrial cancer can specifically include sexual dysfunction, temporary incontinence, and lymphedema, along with more common side effects of any surgery
-risk or high-grade cancers. This is called adjuvant therapy. Chemotherapy Adjuvant chemotherapy is a recent innovation, consisting of some combination of paclitaxel (or other taxanes like docetaxel), doxorubicin (and other anthracyclines), and platins (particularly cisplatin and carboplatin). Adjuvant
in Lynch syndrome, can lead to resistance against platins, meaning that chemotherapy with platins is ineffective in people with these mutations. Side effects of chemotherapy are common. These include hair loss, low neutrophil levels in the blood, and gastrointestinal problems.In cases where surgery is not
certainty evidence suggests that in women with recurrent endometrial cancer who have had chemotherapy, receiving drugs that inhibit the mTOR pathway may reduce the risk of disease worsening compared to having more chemotherapy or hormonal therapy. Though, mTOR inhibitors may increase the chance of experiencing digestive tract ulcers. Radiotherapy
the organ affected; in the case of endometrial cancer a radiation source is placed directly in the vagina. External beam radiotherapy involves a beam of radiation aimed at the affected area from outside the body. VBT is used to treat any remaining cancer solely in the vagina, whereas EBRT
treat remaining cancer elsewhere in the pelvis following surgery. However, the benefits of adjuvant radiotherapy are controversial. Though EBRT significantly reduces the rate of relapse in the pelvis, overall survival and metastasis rates are not improved. VBT provides a better quality of life than EBRT.Radiotherapy can also be
Though EBRT significantly reduces the rate of relapse in the pelvis, overall survival and metastasis rates are not improved. VBT provides a better quality of life than EBRT.Radiotherapy can also be used before surgery in certain cases. When pre-operative imaging or clinical evaluation shows tumor invading the cervix
performed. Brachytherapy and EBRT can also be used, singly or in combination, when there is a contraindication for hysterectomy. Both delivery methods of radiotherapy are associated with side effects, particularly in the gastrointestinal tract. Hormonal therapy Hormonal therapy is only beneficial in certain types of endometrial cancer
-differentiated and known to have progesterone and estrogen receptors, progestins may be used in treatment. There is no evidence to support the use of progestagen in addition to surgery for newly diagnosed endometrial cancer. About 25% of metastatic endometrioid cancers show a response to progestins. Also,
. Progestin receptors function as tumor suppressors in endometrial cancer cells. Preliminary research and clinical trials have shown these treatments to have a high rate of response even in metastatic disease.In 2010 hormonal therapy is of unclear effect in those with advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer. There is insufficient
best prognosis. Stage III and especially Stage IV cancers has a worse prognosis, but these are relatively rare, occurring in only 13% of cases. The median survival time for stage III–IV endometrial cancer is nine to ten months. Older age indicates a worse prognosis.
time of their diagnosis. Tumors with high progesterone receptor expression have a good prognosis compared to tumors with low progesterone receptor expression; 93% of women with high progesterone receptor disease survived to three years, compared with 36% of women with low progesterone receptor disease. Heart disease is
to tumors with low progesterone receptor expression; 93% of women with high progesterone receptor disease survived to three years, compared with 36% of women with low progesterone receptor disease. Heart disease is the most common cause of death among those who survive endometrial cancer, with other obesity
receptor disease survived to three years, compared with 36% of women with low progesterone receptor disease. Heart disease is the most common cause of death among those who survive endometrial cancer, with other obesity-related health problems also being common. Following diagnosis, quality of life is
common cause of death among those who survive endometrial cancer, with other obesity-related health problems also being common. Following diagnosis, quality of life is also positively associated with a healthy lifestyle (no obesity, high-quality diet, physical activity).Recurrence of early stage endometrial cancer ranges
that have metastasized into the lymphatic system. Papillary serous carcinoma, clear cell carcinoma, and endometrioid carcinoma are the subtypes at the highest risk of recurrence. High-grade histological subtypes are also at elevated risk for recurrence.The most common site of recurrence is in the vagina;
the subtypes at the highest risk of recurrence. High-grade histological subtypes are also at elevated risk for recurrence.The most common site of recurrence is in the vagina; vaginal relapses of endometrial cancer have the best prognosis. If relapse occurs from a cancer that has not been
, if possible, chemotherapy. Other common recurrence sites are the pelvic lymph nodes, para-aortic lymph nodes, peritoneum (28% of recurrences), and lungs, though recurrences can also occur in the brain (<1%), liver (7%),
41% of the world's endometrial cancer diagnoses in 2012, whereas Northern Europe, Eastern Europe, and North America together comprised 48% of diagnoses. Unlike most cancers, the number of new cases has risen in recent years, including an increase of over 40% in the
overall, 75% of endometrial cancer occurs after menopause. Women younger than 40 make up 5% of endometrial cancer cases and 10–15% of cases occur in women under 50 years of age. This age group is at risk for developing ovarian cancer at the same time. The
after menopause. Women younger than 40 make up 5% of endometrial cancer cases and 10–15% of cases occur in women under 50 years of age. This age group is at risk for developing ovarian cancer at the same time. The worldwide median age of diagnosis is 63 years
women under 50 years of age. This age group is at risk for developing ovarian cancer at the same time. The worldwide median age of diagnosis is 63 years of age; in the United States, the average age of diagnosis is 60 years of age. White American women
age. This age group is at risk for developing ovarian cancer at the same time. The worldwide median age of diagnosis is 63 years of age; in the United States, the average age of diagnosis is 60 years of age. White American women are at higher risk for
cancer at the same time. The worldwide median age of diagnosis is 63 years of age; in the United States, the average age of diagnosis is 60 years of age. White American women are at higher risk for endometrial cancer than black American women, with a 2.88%
. The worldwide median age of diagnosis is 63 years of age; in the United States, the average age of diagnosis is 60 years of age. White American women are at higher risk for endometrial cancer than black American women, with a 2.88% and 1.69% lifetime risk
to be active against endometrial cancer is olaparib. Research is ongoing in this area as of the 2010s.Research is ongoing on the use of metformin, a diabetes medication, in obese women with endometrial cancer before surgery. Early research has shown it to be effective in slowing the
, a diabetes medication, in obese women with endometrial cancer before surgery. Early research has shown it to be effective in slowing the rate of cancer cell proliferation. Preliminary research has shown that preoperative metformin administration can reduce expression of tumor markers. Long-term use of metformin has
has shown it to be effective in slowing the rate of cancer cell proliferation. Preliminary research has shown that preoperative metformin administration can reduce expression of tumor markers. Long-term use of metformin has not been shown to have a preventative effect against developing cancer, but may improve overall
for advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer. Treatments for rare high-grade undifferentiated endometrial sarcoma are being researched, as there is no established standard of care yet for this disease. Chemotherapies being researched include doxorubicin and ifosfamide.There is also research in progress on more genes and biomarkers that
contraceptives and the IUD is being investigated. Preliminary research has shown that the levonorgestrel IUD placed for a year, combined with 6 monthly injections of gonadotropin-releasing hormone, can stop or reverse the progress of endometrial cancer in young women. An experimental drug that combines a hormone with
is also under investigation for greater efficacy in cancers with hormone receptors.  Hormone therapy that is effective in treating breast cancer, including use of aromatase inhibitors, is also being investigated for use in endometrial cancer. One such drug is anastrozole, which is currently being researched in hormone
being researched in hormone-positive recurrences after chemotherapy. Research into hormonal treatments for endometrial stromal sarcomas is ongoing as well. It includes trials of drugs like mifepristone, a progestin antagonist, and aminoglutethimide and letrozole, two aromatase inhibitors.Research continues into the best imaging method for detecting
under investigation, and already used in some centers, for application in endometrial cancer, to reduce side effects from traditional radiotherapy. Its risk of recurrence has not yet been quantified. Research on hyperbaric oxygen therapy to reduce side effects is also ongoing.  The results of the PORTEC
only upon surgery for unrelated reasons (so-called coincidental carcinoids), all carcinoids are considered to have malignant potential.About 10% of carcinoids secrete excessive levels of a range of hormones, most notably serotonin (5-HT), causing:Flushing (serotonin itself does
-called coincidental carcinoids), all carcinoids are considered to have malignant potential.About 10% of carcinoids secrete excessive levels of a range of hormones, most notably serotonin (5-HT), causing:Flushing (serotonin itself does not cause flushing). Potential causes of
of hormones, most notably serotonin (5-HT), causing:Flushing (serotonin itself does not cause flushing). Potential causes of flushing in carcinoid syndrome include bradykinins, prostaglandins, tachykinins, substance P, and/or histamine, diarrhea, and heart problems. Because of serotonin
flushing in carcinoid syndrome include bradykinins, prostaglandins, tachykinins, substance P, and/or histamine, diarrhea, and heart problems. Because of serotonin's growth-promoting effect on cardiac myocytes, a serotonin-secreting carcinoid tumour may cause a tricuspid valve disease syndrome, due to the proliferation
growth-promoting effect on cardiac myocytes, a serotonin-secreting carcinoid tumour may cause a tricuspid valve disease syndrome, due to the proliferation of myocytes onto the valve.DiarrheaWheezingAbdominal crampingPeripheral edemaThe outflow of serotonin can cause a depletion of tryptophan leading to niacin deficiency. Niacin deficiency, also
-secreting carcinoid tumour may cause a tricuspid valve disease syndrome, due to the proliferation of myocytes onto the valve.DiarrheaWheezingAbdominal crampingPeripheral edemaThe outflow of serotonin can cause a depletion of tryptophan leading to niacin deficiency. Niacin deficiency, also known as pellagra, is associated with dermatitis, dementia
a tricuspid valve disease syndrome, due to the proliferation of myocytes onto the valve.DiarrheaWheezingAbdominal crampingPeripheral edemaThe outflow of serotonin can cause a depletion of tryptophan leading to niacin deficiency. Niacin deficiency, also known as pellagra, is associated with dermatitis, dementia, and diarrhea.This constellation
tryptophan leading to niacin deficiency. Niacin deficiency, also known as pellagra, is associated with dermatitis, dementia, and diarrhea.This constellation of symptoms is called carcinoid syndrome or (if acute) carcinoid crisis. Occasionally, haemorrhage or the effects of tumor bulk are the presenting symptoms
, and diarrhea.This constellation of symptoms is called carcinoid syndrome or (if acute) carcinoid crisis. Occasionally, haemorrhage or the effects of tumor bulk are the presenting symptoms. The most common originating sites of carcinoid is the small bowel, particularly the ileum; carcinoid tumors are
(if acute) carcinoid crisis. Occasionally, haemorrhage or the effects of tumor bulk are the presenting symptoms. The most common originating sites of carcinoid is the small bowel, particularly the ileum; carcinoid tumors are the most common malignancy of the appendix. Carcinoid tumors may rarely arise
gut. Over two-thirds of carcinoid tumors are found in the gastrointestinal tract.Carcinoid tumors are also found in the lungs.Metastasis of carcinoid can lead to carcinoid syndrome. This is due to the over-production of many substances, including serotonin, which are released into
This is considered to be a hybrid between an exocrine and endocrine tumor derived from crypt cells of the appendix. Histologically, it forms clusters of goblet cells containing mucin with a minor admixture of Paneth cells and endocrine cells. The growth pattern is distinctive: typically producing a concentric band
goblet cells containing mucin with a minor admixture of Paneth cells and endocrine cells. The growth pattern is distinctive: typically producing a concentric band of tumor nests interspersed among the muscle and stroma of the appendiceal wall extending up the shaft of the appendix. This makes the lesion difficult to
of neuroendocrine cells which can spread to other parts of the body.Carcinoid syndromeDon Meyer, head coach emeritus of the Northern State University men's basketball team. Meyer was found to have carcinoid cancer following an automobile accident in September 2009.Derrick Bell, Professor and legal scholar, died of
tract. Compared to non-small cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma has a shorter doubling time, higher growth fraction, and earlier development of metastases.Extensive stage small cell lung cancer is classified as a rare disorder. Ten-year relative survival rate is 3.5%; however
have a higher survival rate, 4.3%, and men lower, 2.8%. Survival can be higher or lower based on a combination of factors including stage, age, gender and race.Small-cell lung carcinoma has long been divided into two clinicopathological stages, including limited
clinicopathological stages, including limited stage (LS) and extensive stage (ES). The stage is generally determined by the presence or absence of metastases, whether or not the tumor appears limited to the thorax, and whether or not the entire tumor burden within the chest can feasibly
RR) of between 60% and 90% are seen in LS-SCLC using chemotherapy alone, with between 45% and 75% of individuals showing a "complete response" (CR), which is defined as the disappearance of all radiological and clinical signs of tumor.
75% of individuals showing a "complete response" (CR), which is defined as the disappearance of all radiological and clinical signs of tumor. However, relapse rate remains high, and median survival is only 18 to 24 months.Because SCLC usually metastasizes widely very early
surgical excision may improve survival when used prior to chemotherapy ("adjuvant chemotherapy").In ES-SCLC, platinum-based combination chemotherapy is the standard of care, with radiotherapy added only to palliate symptoms such as dyspnea, pain from liver or bone metastases, or for treatment of brain metastases
the standard of care, with radiotherapy added only to palliate symptoms such as dyspnea, pain from liver or bone metastases, or for treatment of brain metastases, which, in small-cell lung carcinoma, typically have a rapid, if temporary, response to whole brain radiotherapy.
-cell lung carcinoma, typically have a rapid, if temporary, response to whole brain radiotherapy.Combination chemotherapy consists of a wide variety of agents, including cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine and carboplatin. Response rates are high even in extensive disease, with between 15% and 30
, including cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine and carboplatin. Response rates are high even in extensive disease, with between 15% and 30% of subjects having a complete response to combination chemotherapy, and the vast majority having at least some objective response. Responses in ES-SCLC are
vast majority having at least some objective response. Responses in ES-SCLC are often of short duration, and the evidence surrounding the risk of treatment compared to the potential benefit of chemotherapy for people who have extensive SCLC is not clear.If complete response to chemotherapy occurs in a
response. Responses in ES-SCLC are often of short duration, and the evidence surrounding the risk of treatment compared to the potential benefit of chemotherapy for people who have extensive SCLC is not clear.If complete response to chemotherapy occurs in a subject with SCLC, then prophylactic cranial
to chemotherapy occurs in a subject with SCLC, then prophylactic cranial irradiation (PCI) is often used in an attempt to prevent the emergence of brain metastases. Although this treatment is often effective, it can cause hair loss and fatigue. Prospective randomized trials with almost two years follow
treat patients with metastatic small cell lung cancer (SCLC) who failed to respond to platinum-based chemotherapy and at least one other line of treatment. Nivolumab is approved in more than 60 countries. According to LUNGevity Foundation, “This approval marks a major milestone for the patients
the submucosa leading to narrowing of bronchial airways. Common symptoms include cough, dyspnea, weight loss, and debility.  Over 70% of patients with small-cell carcinoma present with metastatic disease; common sites include liver, adrenals, bone, and brain.Due to its
due to the flat cell shape and scanty cytoplasm. Caution is required when diagnosing SCLC, because small cell mesothelioma – an extremely rare subtype of lung cancer – can be mistaken for small cell lung cancer.It is thought to originate from neuroendocrine cells (APUD cells) in the
in the bronchus called Feyrter cells (named for Friedrich Feyrter).Hence, they express a variety of neuroendocrine markers, and may lead to ectopic production of hormones like ADH and ACTH that may result in paraneoplastic syndromes and Cushing's syndrome. Approximately half of all individuals diagnosed with Lambert-Eaton
its metastatic progression are not well-understood.Small-cell lung carcinoma can occur in combination with a wide variety of other histological variants of lung cancer, including extremely complex malignant tissue admixtures.When it is found with one or more differentiated forms of lung cancer, such as
variety of other histological variants of lung cancer, including extremely complex malignant tissue admixtures.When it is found with one or more differentiated forms of lung cancer, such as squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma, the malignant tumor is then diagnosed and classified as a combined small cell lung carcinoma
rates are much higher than other small-cell carcinomas.In the prostate, small-cell carcinoma (SCCP) is a rare form of cancer (approx 1% of PC). Due to the fact that there is little variation in prostate specific antigen levels, this form
cancer (approx 1% of PC). Due to the fact that there is little variation in prostate specific antigen levels, this form of cancer is normally diagnosed at an advanced stage, after metastasis.It can metastasize to the brain.TP53 is mutated in 70 to 90
is normally diagnosed at an advanced stage, after metastasis.It can metastasize to the brain.TP53 is mutated in 70 to 90% of SCLCs. RB1 and the retinoblastoma pathway are inactivated in most SCLCs. PTEN is mutated in 2 to 10%. MYC amplifications and amplification
in most SCLCs. PTEN is mutated in 2 to 10%. MYC amplifications and amplification of MYC family members are found in 30% of SCLCs. Loss of heterozygocity on chromosome arm 3p is found in more than 80% of SCLCs, including the loss of FHIT. One
PTEN is mutated in 2 to 10%. MYC amplifications and amplification of MYC family members are found in 30% of SCLCs. Loss of heterozygocity on chromosome arm 3p is found in more than 80% of SCLCs, including the loss of FHIT. One hundred translocations have so
of MYC family members are found in 30% of SCLCs. Loss of heterozygocity on chromosome arm 3p is found in more than 80% of SCLCs, including the loss of FHIT. One hundred translocations have so far been reported in SCLCs (see the "Mitelman Database" and
lung.Distant: the cancer has spread (or metastasized) to other parts of the body (aka: extensive stage SCLC).At the time of diagnosis, 60–70% of people already have metastases.Small-cell carcinoma is an undifferentiated neoplasm composed of primitive-appearing cells. As
cancer has spread (or metastasized) to other parts of the body (aka: extensive stage SCLC).At the time of diagnosis, 60–70% of people already have metastases.Small-cell carcinoma is an undifferentiated neoplasm composed of primitive-appearing cells. As the name implies, the
effective than one drug alone.Cisplatin and etoposide,Carboplatin and etoposide. Cisplatin-resistance The drug paclitaxel may be useful in the treatment of cisplatin-resistant cancer. About 68.1% of cisplatin-resistant cellsappear to be sensitive to paclitaxel and 66.7% of paclitaxel-resistant cells
,Carboplatin and etoposide. Cisplatin-resistance The drug paclitaxel may be useful in the treatment of cisplatin-resistant cancer. About 68.1% of cisplatin-resistant cellsappear to be sensitive to paclitaxel and 66.7% of paclitaxel-resistant cells tocisplatin. The mechanism for this activity is unknown
useful in the treatment of cisplatin-resistant cancer. About 68.1% of cisplatin-resistant cellsappear to be sensitive to paclitaxel and 66.7% of paclitaxel-resistant cells tocisplatin. The mechanism for this activity is unknown. Paclitaxel-based chemotherapy showed modest activity in SCLC patients refractory to
by United Kingdom also citing "drug’s cost-effectiveness."Chest radiation helps SCLC patients live longer by killing cancer cells and helping prevention of cancer recurrence. Another type of radiation, prophylactic cranial radiation, prevents central nervous system recurrence and can improve survival in patients with good performance
drug’s cost-effectiveness."Chest radiation helps SCLC patients live longer by killing cancer cells and helping prevention of cancer recurrence. Another type of radiation, prophylactic cranial radiation, prevents central nervous system recurrence and can improve survival in patients with good performance status who have had a complete
or a very good partial response to chemoradiation in LD or chemotherapy in ED.If small cell lung cancer comes back after treatment, the following combination of drugs may be used as a salvage therapy:Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan, Procytox),Doxorubicin (Adriamycin) andVincristine (Oncovin)Paclitaxel (Taxol)Irinotecan (Camptosar) Current
.The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates based on age, sex, and race and is considered the most accurate source of survival information. This database uses terms "Localized," "Regional," and "Distant" to describe various stages of small cell
diagnosis) | Distant (ES SCLC) | = 6.1% National Cancer Institute's SEER maintains publicly accessible database for specific survival rates.15% of lung cancers in the US are of this type. Small cell lung cancer occurs almost exclusively in smokers – most commonly in heavy smokers and
, white blood cells or platelets are produced in the bone marrow.  Myelo refers to the bone marrow, proliferative describes the rapid growth of blood cells and neoplasm describes that growth as abnormal and uncontrolled.The overproduction of blood cells is often associated with a somatic mutation, for
refers to the bone marrow, proliferative describes the rapid growth of blood cells and neoplasm describes that growth as abnormal and uncontrolled.The overproduction of blood cells is often associated with a somatic mutation, for example in the JAK2, CALR, TET2, and MPL gene markers.In
(abnormal growth) starts out as benign and can later become malignant.As of 2016, the World Health Organization lists the following subcategories of MPNs:Chronic myeloid leukemia  (CML)Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL)Polycythemia vera (PV)Primary myelofibrosis (PMF)PMF, Prefibrotic StagePMF, Overt Fibrotic StageEssential thrombocythemia
blast cells) of the myeloid lineages in the bone marrow develop somatic mutations which cause them to grow abnormally. There is a similar category of disease for the lymphoid lineage, the lymphoproliferative disorders acute lymphoblastic leukemia, lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple myeloma.People with MPNs might
saturation and carboxyhaemoglobin level, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase level, vitamin B12 (or B12 binding capacity), serum urate or direct sequencing of the patient's DNA. According to WHO diagnostic criteria published in 2016, myeloproliferative neoplasms are diagnosed as follows:Chronic myeloid leukemiaChronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
and carboxyhaemoglobin level, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase level, vitamin B12 (or B12 binding capacity), serum urate or direct sequencing of the patient's DNA. According to WHO diagnostic criteria published in 2016, myeloproliferative neoplasms are diagnosed as follows:Chronic myeloid leukemiaChronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
) mutation.Chronic neutrophilic leukemiaChronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) is characterized by a mutation in the CSF3R gene and an exclusion of other causes of neutrophilia.Essential thrombocythemiaEssential thrombocythemia (ET) is diagnosed with a platelet count greater than 450 × 109/L and
platelet count greater than 450 × 109/L and is associated with the JAK2 V617F mutation in up to 55% of cases and with an MPL (thrombopoietin receptor) mutation in up to 5% of cases:. There should be no increase in reticulin
with the JAK2 V617F mutation in up to 55% of cases and with an MPL (thrombopoietin receptor) mutation in up to 5% of cases:. There should be no increase in reticulin fibers and the patient should not meet the criteria for other MPNs, in particular Pre
MPNs, in particular Pre-PMF.Polycythemia veraPolycythemia vera (PV) is associated most often with the JAK2 V617F mutation in greater than 95% of cases, whereas the remainder have a JAK2 exon 12 mutation. High hemoglobin or hematocrit counts are required, as is a bone marrow examination
of the other categories.No curative drug treatment exists for MPNs. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can be a curative treatment for a small group of patients, however MPN treatment is typically focused on symptom control and myelosuppressive drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of
curative treatment for a small group of patients, however MPN treatment is typically focused on symptom control and myelosuppressive drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of
of patients, however MPN treatment is typically focused on symptom control and myelosuppressive drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of anemia, splenomegaly, and other
drugs to help control the production of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of anemia, splenomegaly, and other symptoms. Low-dose aspirin is effective in PV and ET. Tyrosine
of blood cells.The goal of treatment for ET and PV is prevention of thrombohemorrhagic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is amelioration of anemia, splenomegaly, and other symptoms. Low-dose aspirin is effective in PV and ET. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors like imatinib have improved
primary myelofibrosis. Trials of these inhibitors are in progress for the treatment of the other myeloproliferative neoplasms.Although considered rare diseases, incidence rates of MPNs are increasing, in some cases tripling. It is hypothesized that the increase may be related to improved diagnostic abilities from the identification of
thrombocythemia and primary myelofibrosis.The concept of myeloproliferative disease was first proposed in 1951 by the hematologist William Dameshek.The discovery of the association of MPNs with the JAK2 gene marker in 2005 and the CALR marker in 2013 improved the ability to classify MPNs.MPNs were classified as blood
clinical trials usually includes increased respiratory rate, abnormal blood gases (hypoxemia, hypercapnia, or both), and  evidence of increased work of breathing. Respiratory failure causes an altered mental status due to ischemia in the brain.The normal partial pressure reference values are: oxygen Pa
O2 more than 80 mmHg (11 kPa), and carbon dioxide Pa CO2 less than 45 mmHg (6.0 kPa). Several types of conditions can potentially result in respiratory failure:Conditions which reduce the flow of air into and out of the lungs, including physical obstruction by
CO2 less than 45 mmHg (6.0 kPa). Several types of conditions can potentially result in respiratory failure:Conditions which reduce the flow of air into and out of the lungs, including physical obstruction by foreign bodies or masses, and reduced breathing ability due to drugs or changes
(in no particular order) infections, interstitial lung disease, and pulmonary oedema.Type 1 respiratory failure is defined as a low level of oxygen in the blood (hypoxemia) with either a normal (normocapnia) or low (hypocapnia) level of carbon dioxide (PaCO2)
defined as a low level of oxygen in the blood (hypoxemia) with either a normal (normocapnia) or low (hypocapnia) level of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) but not an increased level (hypercapnia). It is typically caused by a ventilation/perfusion (V/
not an increased level (hypercapnia). It is typically caused by a ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch; the volume of air flowing in and out of the lungs is not matched with the flow of blood to the lungs. The basic defect in type 1
/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch; the volume of air flowing in and out of the lungs is not matched with the flow of blood to the lungs. The basic defect in type 1 respiratory failure is failure of oxygenation characterized by:This type of respiratory failure is
out of the lungs is not matched with the flow of blood to the lungs. The basic defect in type 1 respiratory failure is failure of oxygenation characterized by:This type of respiratory failure is caused by conditions that affect oxygenation such as:Low ambient oxygen (e.g. at high
by:Type 2 respiratory failure is caused by inadequate alveolar ventilation; both oxygen and carbon dioxide are affected.  Defined as the buildup of carbon dioxide levels (PaCO2) that has been generated by the body but cannot be eliminated. The underlying causes include:Increased airways
infections), glucocorticoids (for numerous causes), diuretics (for pulmonary edema), amongst others. Respiratory failure resulting from an overdose of opioids may be treated with the antidote naloxone. In contrast, most benzodiazepine overdose does not benefit from its antidote, flumazenil. Respiratory therapy
physiotherapy may be beneficial in some causes of respiratory failure.Type 1 respiratory failure may require oxygen therapy to achieve adequate oxygen saturations. Lack of response to oxygen may be an indication for other modalities such as heated humidified high-flow therapy, continuous positive airway pressure or (if

abnormal cells that build up in the bone marrow and blood and interfere with normal blood cell production. Symptoms may include feeling tired, shortness of breath, easy bruising and bleeding, and increased risk of infection. Occasionally, spread may occur to the brain, skin, or gums
and interfere with normal blood cell production. Symptoms may include feeling tired, shortness of breath, easy bruising and bleeding, and increased risk of infection. Occasionally, spread may occur to the brain, skin, or gums. As an acute leukemia, AML progresses rapidly and is
Older people whose health is too poor for intensive chemotherapy have a typical survival of five to ten months. It accounts for roughly 1.8% of cancer deaths in the United States.Most signs and symptoms of AML are caused by the replacement of normal blood cells with leukemic cells.
they have no infection-fighting capacity. A drop in red blood cell count (anemia) can cause fatigue, paleness, and shortness of breath. A lack of platelets can lead to easy bruising or bleeding with minor trauma.The early signs of AML are often vague and
fighting capacity. A drop in red blood cell count (anemia) can cause fatigue, paleness, and shortness of breath. A lack of platelets can lead to easy bruising or bleeding with minor trauma.The early signs of AML are often vague and nonspecific, and may be
, and may be similar to those of influenza or other common illnesses. Some generalized symptoms include fever, fatigue, weight loss or loss of appetite, shortness of breath, anemia, easy bruising or bleeding, petechiae (flat, pin-head sized spots under the skin caused
similar to those of influenza or other common illnesses. Some generalized symptoms include fever, fatigue, weight loss or loss of appetite, shortness of breath, anemia, easy bruising or bleeding, petechiae (flat, pin-head sized spots under the skin caused by bleeding),
swelling is rare in AML, in contrast to acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The skin is involved about 10% of the time in the form of leukemia cutis. Rarely, Sweet's syndrome, a paraneoplastic inflammation of the skin, can occur with AML.Some people with AML may experience swelling
AML.Some people with AML may experience swelling of the gums because of infiltration of leukemic cells into the gum tissue. Rarely, the first sign of leukemia may be the development of a solid leukemic mass or tumor outside of the bone marrow, called a chloroma. Occasionally, a person
chloroma. Occasionally, a person may show no symptoms, and the leukemia may be discovered incidentally during a routine blood test.A number of risk factors for developing AML have been identified, including: other blood disorders, chemical exposures, ionizing radiation, and genetics."Preleukemic"
evolve into AML; the exact risk depends on the type of MDS/MPN. The presence of asymptomatic clonal hematopoiesis also raises the risk of transformation into AML to 0.5–1.0% per year.Exposure to anticancer chemotherapy, in particular alkylating agents, can increase the risk of subsequently developing
of AML. Survivors of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki had an increased rate of AML, as did radiologists exposed to high levels of X-rays prior to the adoption of modern radiation safety practices. People treated with ionizing radiation after treatment for prostate cancer, non-
of AML developing in a family at a rate higher than predicted by chance alone have been reported. Several congenital conditions may increase the risk of leukemia; the most common is probably Down syndrome, which is associated with a 10- to 18-fold increase in the risk of AML
, inactivating mutations in one of the two parental GATA2 genes lead to a reduction, i.e. a haploinsufficiency, in the cellular levels of the gene's product, the GATA2 transcription factor, and thereby to a rare autosomal dominant genetic disease, GATA2 deficiency. This disease is associated with a
inactivating mutations in one of the two parental GATA2 genes lead to a reduction, i.e. a haploinsufficiency, in the cellular levels of the gene's product, the GATA2 transcription factor, and thereby to a rare autosomal dominant genetic disease, GATA2 deficiency. This disease is associated with a
GATA2 transcription factor, and thereby to a rare autosomal dominant genetic disease, GATA2 deficiency. This disease is associated with a highly variable set of disorders including an exceedingly high risk of developing AML. The specific genetic abnormalities causing AML usually vary between those who develop the disease as a
folic acid deficiency and copper deficiency.Marrow or blood is examined under light microscopy, as well as flow cytometry, to diagnose the presence of leukemia, to differentiate AML from other types of leukemia (e.g. acute lymphoblastic leukemia – ALL), and to classify the subtype of disease
blood is examined under light microscopy, as well as flow cytometry, to diagnose the presence of leukemia, to differentiate AML from other types of leukemia (e.g. acute lymphoblastic leukemia – ALL), and to classify the subtype of disease. A sample of marrow or blood is typically
presence of leukemia, to differentiate AML from other types of leukemia (e.g. acute lymphoblastic leukemia – ALL), and to classify the subtype of disease. A sample of marrow or blood is typically also tested for chromosomal abnormalities by routine cytogenetics or fluorescent in situ hybridization. Genetic studies
differentiate AML from other types of leukemia (e.g. acute lymphoblastic leukemia – ALL), and to classify the subtype of disease. A sample of marrow or blood is typically also tested for chromosomal abnormalities by routine cytogenetics or fluorescent in situ hybridization. Genetic studies may also be performed to
myelodysplastic or myeloproliferative syndromes, which are treated differently.Because acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has the highest curability and requires a unique form of treatment, it is important to quickly establish or exclude the diagnosis of this subtype of leukemia. Fluorescent in situ hybridization performed on blood or
) has the highest curability and requires a unique form of treatment, it is important to quickly establish or exclude the diagnosis of this subtype of leukemia. Fluorescent in situ hybridization performed on blood or bone marrow is often used for this purpose, as it readily identifies the chromosomal translocation
to be more clinically useful and to produce more meaningful prognostic information than the FAB criteria. Each of the WHO categories contains numerous descriptive subcategories of interest to the hematopathologist and oncologist; however, most of the clinically significant information in the WHO schema is communicated via categorization into one of
phenotype or biphenotypic acute leukemia) occur when the leukemic cells can not be classified as either myeloid or lymphoid cells, or where both types of cells are present.The French-American-British (FAB) classification system divides AML into eight subtypes, M0 through to M7,
The French-American-British (FAB) classification system divides AML into eight subtypes, M0 through to M7, based on the type of cell from which the leukemia developed and its degree of maturity. AML of types M0 to M2 may be called acute myeloblastic leukemia.  
system divides AML into eight subtypes, M0 through to M7, based on the type of cell from which the leukemia developed and its degree of maturity. AML of types M0 to M2 may be called acute myeloblastic leukemia.  Classification is done by examining the appearance of the malignant
a "differentiation arrest" is combined with other mutations which disrupt genes controlling proliferation, the result is the uncontrolled growth of an immature clone of cells, leading to the clinical entity of AML.Much of the diversity and heterogeneity of AML is because leukemic transformation can occur at a number of
, or solid tumor of leukemic cells outside the bone marrow, which can cause various symptoms depending on its location.An important pathophysiological mechanism of leukemogenesis in AML is the epigenetic induction of dedifferentiation by genetic mutations that alter the function of epigenetic enzymes, such as the DNA demethylase TET2
the bone marrow, which can cause various symptoms depending on its location.An important pathophysiological mechanism of leukemogenesis in AML is the epigenetic induction of dedifferentiation by genetic mutations that alter the function of epigenetic enzymes, such as the DNA demethylase TET2 and the metabolic enzymes IDH1 and IDH2,
D-2-hydroxyglutarate, which inhibits the activity of epigenetic enzymes such as TET2. The hypothesis is that such epigenetic mutations lead to the silencing of tumor suppressor genes and/or the activation of proto-oncogenes.First-line treatment of AML consists primarily of chemotherapy, and is divided into
activity of epigenetic enzymes such as TET2. The hypothesis is that such epigenetic mutations lead to the silencing of tumor suppressor genes and/or the activation of proto-oncogenes.First-line treatment of AML consists primarily of chemotherapy, and is divided into two phases: induction and postremission (
treatment of AML consists primarily of chemotherapy, and is divided into two phases: induction and postremission (or consolidation) therapy. The goal of induction therapy is to achieve a complete remission by reducing the number of leukemic cells to an undetectable level; the goal of consolidation therapy is
. The goal of induction therapy is to achieve a complete remission by reducing the number of leukemic cells to an undetectable level; the goal of consolidation therapy is to eliminate any residual undetectable disease and achieve a cure. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is usually considered if induction chemotherapy fails or
a continuous IV infusion for seven consecutive days while the anthracycline is given for three consecutive days as an IV push. Up to 70% of people with AML will achieve a remission with this protocol. Other alternative induction regimens, including high-dose cytarabine alone, FLAG-like
, including high-dose cytarabine alone, FLAG-like regimens or investigational agents, may also be used. Because of the toxic effects of therapy, including myelosuppression and an increased risk of infection, induction chemotherapy may not be offered to the very elderly, and the options may
-like regimens or investigational agents, may also be used. Because of the toxic effects of therapy, including myelosuppression and an increased risk of infection, induction chemotherapy may not be offered to the very elderly, and the options may include less intense chemotherapy or palliative care.The
remission is obtained in about 50%–75% of newly diagnosed adults, although this may vary based on the prognostic factors described above. The length of remission depends on the prognostic features of the original leukemia. In general, all remissions will fail without additional consolidation therapy.There is insufficient
. Therefore, more therapy is necessary to eliminate nondetectable disease and prevent relapse – that is, to achieve a cure.The specific type of postremission therapy is individualized based on a person's prognostic factors (see above) and general health. For good-prognosis leukemias (i.e.
), people will typically undergo an additional three to five courses of intensive chemotherapy, known as consolidation chemotherapy. For people at high risk of relapse (e.g. those with high-risk cytogenetics, underlying MDS, or therapy-related AML), allogeneic stem cell transplantation is usually
high-risk groups) is less clear and depends on the specific situation, including the age and overall health of the person, the person's values, and whether a suitable stem cell donor is available.For people who are not eligible for a stem cell transplant, immunotherapy with
-risk groups) is less clear and depends on the specific situation, including the age and overall health of the person, the person's values, and whether a suitable stem cell donor is available.For people who are not eligible for a stem cell transplant, immunotherapy with
and whether a suitable stem cell donor is available.For people who are not eligible for a stem cell transplant, immunotherapy with a combination of histamine dihydrochloride (Ceplene) and interleukin 2 (Proleukin) after the completion of consolidation has been shown to reduce the absolute relapse risk by
eligible for a stem cell transplant, immunotherapy with a combination of histamine dihydrochloride (Ceplene) and interleukin 2 (Proleukin) after the completion of consolidation has been shown to reduce the absolute relapse risk by 14%, translating to a 50% increase in the likelihood of maintained remission
for relapsed AML are so limited, palliative care or enrollment in a clinical trial may be offered.Adding aerobic physical exercises to the standard of care may result in little to no difference in the mortality, in the quality of life and in the physical functioning. These exercises may
be offered.Adding aerobic physical exercises to the standard of care may result in little to no difference in the mortality, in the quality of life and in the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression. Furthermore, aerobic physical exercises probably reduce fatigue
graft-versus-host disease, and suffer from bleeding events that may require platelet transfusions.AML is a curable disease. The chance of cure for a specific person depends on a number of prognostic factors.The single most important prognostic factor in AML is cytogenetics, or the
cell. Certain cytogenetic abnormalities are associated with very good outcomes (for example, the (15;17) translocation in APL). About half of people with AML have "normal" cytogenetics; they fall into an intermediate risk group. A number of other cytogenetic abnormalities are known to
they fall into an intermediate risk group. A number of other cytogenetic abnormalities are known to associate with a poor prognosis and a high risk of relapse after treatment.The first publication to address cytogenetics and prognosis was the MRC trial of 1998:Later, the Southwest Oncology Group and
, the Southwest Oncology Group and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group and, later still, Cancer and Leukemia Group B published other, mostly overlapping lists of cytogenetics prognostication in leukemia.AML arising from a pre-existing myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or myeloproliferative disease (so-called secondary AML
abnormalities.In some studies, age >60 years and elevated lactate dehydrogenase level were also associated with poorer outcomes. As with most forms of cancer, performance status (i.e. the general physical condition and activity level of the person) plays a major role in prognosis as well.
prognosis as well.The five-year survival rate is about 25% overall.  Age plays a significant role:  40% of people under the age of 60, but just 10% of those over it, live five years after diagnosis. Genotype A large number
associated with improved outcomes, especially in people with normal cytogenetics and are used in current risk stratification algorithms.Researchers are investigating the clinical significance of c-KIT mutations in AML. These are prevalent, and potentially clinically relevant because of the availability of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
Researchers are investigating the clinical significance of c-KIT mutations in AML. These are prevalent, and potentially clinically relevant because of the availability of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as imatinib and sunitinib that can block the activity of c-KIT pharmacologically. It is expected that additional markers
are prevalent, and potentially clinically relevant because of the availability of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as imatinib and sunitinib that can block the activity of c-KIT pharmacologically. It is expected that additional markers (e.g., RUNX1, ASXL1, and TP53) that have consistently been associated
diagnosis is 63 years. AML accounts for about 90% of all acute leukemias in adults, but is rare in children. The rate of therapy-related AML (that is, AML caused by previous chemotherapy) is rising; therapy-related disease currently accounts for about 10–20
% of all leukemia cases in the UK, and around 2,900 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011.The first published description of a case of leukemia in medical literature dates to 1827 when French physician Alfred-Armand-Louis-Marie Velpeau described a 63-year-old florist
had a consistency "like gruel", and speculated the appearance of the blood was due to white corpuscles. In 1845, a series of people who died with enlarged spleens and changes in the "colors and consistencies of their blood" was reported by the Edinburgh-based pathologist
marrow (Greek: μυєλός, myelos, lit.  '(bone) marrow') as opposed to the spleen. The technique of bone marrow examination to diagnose leukemia was first described in 1879 by Mosler. Finally, in 1900, the myeloblast, which is the malignant
Leukemia is rarely associated with pregnancy, affecting only about 1 in 10,000 pregnant women.  How it is handled depends primarily on the type of leukemia.  Acute leukemias normally require prompt, aggressive treatment, despite significant risks of pregnancy loss and birth defects, especially if chemotherapy is
 How it is handled depends primarily on the type of leukemia.  Acute leukemias normally require prompt, aggressive treatment, despite significant risks of pregnancy loss and birth defects, especially if chemotherapy is given during the developmentally sensitive first trimester.Acute myeloid leukemia at CurlieGeneReviews/NIH/

a broad term that includes bone, cartilage, fat, vascular, or hematopoietic tissues, and sarcomas can arise in any of these types of tissues. As a result, there are many subtypes of sarcoma, which are classified based on the specific tissue and type of cell from
vascular, or hematopoietic tissues, and sarcomas can arise in any of these types of tissues. As a result, there are many subtypes of sarcoma, which are classified based on the specific tissue and type of cell from which the tumor originates. Sarcomas are primary connective tissue tumors
these types of tissues. As a result, there are many subtypes of sarcoma, which are classified based on the specific tissue and type of cell from which the tumor originates. Sarcomas are primary connective tissue tumors, meaning that they arise in connective tissues. This is in contrast
of which has multiple subtypes. In the United States, the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) publishes guidelines that classify the subtypes of sarcoma. These subtypes are as follows:OsteosarcomaChondrosarcomaPoorly differentiated round/spindle cell tumors (includes Ewing sarcoma)HemangioendotheliomaAngiosarcomaFibrosarcoma/myofibrosarcomaChordomaAdamantinomaOther:LiposarcomaLeiomyosarcomaMalignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumorPerivascular epithelioid cell tumor, not otherwise specifiedIntimal sarcomaUndifferentiated spindle cell sarcomaUndifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomaUndifferentiated round cell sarcomaUndifferentiated epithelioid sarcomaUndifferentiated sarcoma, not otherwise specified.Symptoms of bone sarcomas typically include bone pain, especially at night, and swelling around the site of the tumor.Symptoms of soft-tissue sarcomas
tumors (a subtype of soft tissue sarcoma) often are asymptomatic, but can be associated with vague complaints of abdominal pain, a feeling of fullness, or other signs of intestinal obstruction.The cause of most bone sarcomas is not known, but several factors are associated with an
) is one such risk factor. Exposure to alkylating agents, such as those found in certain cancer chemotherapeutic medicines, also increases the risk of bone sarcoma. Certain inherited genetic syndromes, including Li-Fraumeni syndrome, heritable RB1 gene mutations, and Paget's disease of bone,
the risk of bone sarcoma. Certain inherited genetic syndromes, including Li-Fraumeni syndrome, heritable RB1 gene mutations, and Paget's disease of bone, are associated with an increased risk of developing bone sarcomas.Most soft tissue sarcomas arise from what doctors call "sporadic" (
developing bone sarcomas.Most soft tissue sarcomas arise from what doctors call "sporadic" (or random) genetic mutations within an affected person's cells. Nevertheless, there are certain risk factors associated with an increased risk of developing soft tissue sarcoma. Previous exposure to ionizing radiation is
such as the fumes encountered in the production of Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)), Arsenic and Thorotrast all are associated with an increased risk of angiosarcoma.  Lymphedema, such as that resulting from certain types of breast cancer treatment, also is a risk factor for development of angiosarcoma
)), Arsenic and Thorotrast all are associated with an increased risk of angiosarcoma.  Lymphedema, such as that resulting from certain types of breast cancer treatment, also is a risk factor for development of angiosarcoma. As with bone sarcomas, certain inherited genetic syndromes also are associated
risk of angiosarcoma.  Lymphedema, such as that resulting from certain types of breast cancer treatment, also is a risk factor for development of angiosarcoma. As with bone sarcomas, certain inherited genetic syndromes also are associated with an increased risk of developing soft tissue sarcoma, including Li
see Cancer main page; Carcinogenesis main page). The precise molecular changes that result in sarcoma are not always known, but certain types of sarcomas are associated with particular genetic mutations. Examples include:Most cases of Ewing sarcoma are associated with a chromosomal translocation in which part of
of sarcomas are associated with particular genetic mutations. Examples include:Most cases of Ewing sarcoma are associated with a chromosomal translocation in which part of chromosome 11 fuses with part of chromosome 22. This results in the EWS gene becoming fused to other genes, including the FLI1 gene in
genetic mutations. Examples include:Most cases of Ewing sarcoma are associated with a chromosomal translocation in which part of chromosome 11 fuses with part of chromosome 22. This results in the EWS gene becoming fused to other genes, including the FLI1 gene in 90% of Ewing cases and
EWS gene becoming fused to other genes, including the FLI1 gene in 90% of Ewing cases and ERG gene in 5-10% of cases. These fusions result in the production of abnormal proteins, although how these abnormal proteins result in cancer is not fully known.Dermatofibrosarcoma
. This results in increased CSF1 protein production, which is thought to play a role in cancer development.Many liposarcomas are associated with duplication of part of chromosome 12, which results in extra copies of known cancer-promoting genes ("oncogenes") such as the CDK4 gene
results in increased CSF1 protein production, which is thought to play a role in cancer development.Many liposarcomas are associated with duplication of part of chromosome 12, which results in extra copies of known cancer-promoting genes ("oncogenes") such as the CDK4 gene, the
of known cancer-promoting genes ("oncogenes") such as the CDK4 gene, the MDM2 gene and the HMGA2 gene.Diagnosis of bone sarcomas begins with a thorough history and physical examination which may reveal characteristic signs and symptoms (see Signs and Symptoms above). Laboratory
resonance imaging (MRI) studies and radioisotope bone scans. Computed tomography (CT) imaging typically is not used in diagnosis of most types of bone sarcoma, although it is an important tool for staging (see below). Definitive diagnosis requires biopsy of the tumor and careful review
its most common use is for staging (see below). As with bone sarcomas, definitive diagnosis requires biopsy of the tumor with evaluation of histology by a trained pathologist.In general, cancer staging refers to how advanced a cancer is, and usually it is based upon factors
to other parts of the body. Staging is important because the stage affects the prognosis (likely outcome), as well as the types of treatments that are likely to be effective against the cancer. With sarcomas, staging requires a determination of whether the tumor has grown into surrounding
usually treated surgically, although sometimes radiation therapy or chemotherapy are used. Intermediate- and high-grade sarcomas are more frequently treated with a combination of surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy. Since high-grade tumors are more likely to undergo metastasis (invasion and spread to locoregional and
locoregional and distant sites), they are treated more aggressively. The recognition that many sarcomas are sensitive to chemotherapy has dramatically improved the survival of patients. For example, in the era before chemotherapy, long-term survival for pediatric patients with localized osteosarcoma was only about 20%
and other diseases. As of March 2019, the USPSTF does not recommend screening for sarcoma, possibly because it is a very rare type of cancer (see Epidemiology below).The American Cancer Society (ACS) also publishes guidelines recommending preventive screening for certain types of common cancers. Like the
spread to other parts of the body. Limb-sparing surgery, as opposed to amputation, can now be used to save the limbs of patients in at least 90% of extremity (arm or leg) sarcoma cases. Additional treatments, including chemotherapy, radiation therapy (also
. Limb-sparing surgery, as opposed to amputation, can now be used to save the limbs of patients in at least 90% of extremity (arm or leg) sarcoma cases. Additional treatments, including chemotherapy, radiation therapy (also called "radiotherapy") and proton
. Adjuvant radiotherapy may also be used after surgical excision for liposarcoma.Rhabdomyosarcoma is treated with surgery, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy. The majority of rhabdomyosarcoma patients have a 50–85% survival rate.Osteosarcoma is a tumor of the bone that is treated with surgical resection of as much of
of as much of the cancer as possible, often along with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Radiotherapy is a second alternative although not as successful.Expression of receptor B7-H3 provides a promising target for new immunotherapeutic strategies.In childhood sarcomas, the cytotoxic agent cyclophosphamide is widely used and has
In childhood sarcomas, the cytotoxic agent cyclophosphamide is widely used and has shown good anti-tumour efficacy.It is believed that higher doses of chemotherapy might improve survival. However, high doses of chemotherapy stop the production of blood cells in the bone marrow and can be harmful.
used and has shown good anti-tumour efficacy.It is believed that higher doses of chemotherapy might improve survival. However, high doses of chemotherapy stop the production of blood cells in the bone marrow and can be harmful. Stem cells collected from people before high‐dose chemotherapy can be
anti-tumour efficacy.It is believed that higher doses of chemotherapy might improve survival. However, high doses of chemotherapy stop the production of blood cells in the bone marrow and can be harmful. Stem cells collected from people before high‐dose chemotherapy can be transplanted back to the person
treatment arms with respect to overall survival. Further evidence is needed through well‐designed clinical trials.The AJCC has identified several factors that affect prognosis of bone sarcomas:Size of the tumor: larger tumors tend to have a worse prognosis compared to smaller tumors.Spread of tumor to surrounding
that affect prognosis of bone sarcomas:Size of the tumor: larger tumors tend to have a worse prognosis compared to smaller tumors.Spread of tumor to surrounding tissues: tumors that have spread locally to surrounding tissues tend to have a worse prognosis compared to tumors that have not spread
tissues: tumors that have spread locally to surrounding tissues tend to have a worse prognosis compared to tumors that have not spread beyond their place of origin.Stage and presence of metastases: tumors that have spread ("metastasized") to the lymph nodes (which is rare for
locally to surrounding tissues tend to have a worse prognosis compared to tumors that have not spread beyond their place of origin.Stage and presence of metastases: tumors that have spread ("metastasized") to the lymph nodes (which is rare for bone sarcomas) or other organs
to low-grade tumors.For GISTs, the key factor that affects prognosis is:Mitotic rate: mitotic rate refers to the fraction of cells that are actively dividing within the tumor; GISTs that have a high mitotic rate have a worse prognosis compared to GISTs that have a
cancer deaths. The median age at death is 61 years old, although death can occur in any age group. Thus, 12.3% of bone sarcoma deaths occur in people under 20 years old, 13.8% occur in people 20–34 years old, 5.5% occur in people 35–44
, accounting for 0.9% of all cancer deaths.Sarcomas are quite rare. The risk of a previously healthy person receiving a new diagnosis of bone cancer is less than 0.001%, while the risk of receiving a new diagnosis of soft tissue sarcoma is between 0.0014-0.005%
soft tissue sarcoma is between 0.0014-0.005%. The American Cancer Society estimates that in the United States there will be 3,500 new cases of bone sarcoma in 2019, and 12,750 new cases of soft tissue sarcoma. Considering that the total estimated number of new cancer diagnoses (all
sarcoma in 2019, and 12,750 new cases of soft tissue sarcoma. Considering that the total estimated number of new cancer diagnoses (all types of cancer) is 1,762,450, this means bone sarcomas represent only 0.2% of all new cancer diagnoses (making them the 30th most common type
cancer) is 1,762,450, this means bone sarcomas represent only 0.2% of all new cancer diagnoses (making them the 30th most common type of cancer) and soft tissue sarcomas represent only 0.7% (making them the 22nd most common type of cancer) of all new cancer diagnoses
making them the 30th most common type of cancer) and soft tissue sarcomas represent only 0.7% (making them the 22nd most common type of cancer) of all new cancer diagnoses in the US in 2019. These estimates are similar to previously reported data.Sarcomas affect people of
diagnoses in the US in 2019. These estimates are similar to previously reported data.Sarcomas affect people of all ages. Around 50% of bone sarcomas and 20% of soft-tissue sarcomas are diagnosed in people under the age of 35. Some sarcomas, such as leiomyosarcoma
year-old fossil from the skeleton of now-extinct hominin species, making it the earliest-known case of human cancer.Treatment of sarcoma, especially when the sarcoma has spread, or "metastasized", often requires chemotherapy but existing chemotherapeutic medicines are associated with significant toxicities
killing cancer cells. Therefore, research to identify new medications to treat sarcoma is being conducted as of 2019. One possibility is the use of cancer immunotherapy (e.g., immune checkpoint inhibitors like anti-PD1, anti-PDL1, and anti-CTLA4 agents) to treat sarcomas
cause sarcoma to develop is underway. This could allow for the design of new targeted therapies and allow physicians to more accurately predict a patient's prognosis.Presence of the H3-B3 immunoregulatory checkpoint receptor in the tumor cells provides the opportunity for clinical trial testing of new drugs and
, which is believed to be due to better detection. In 2015, it resulted in 31,900 deaths.Most often, the first symptom of thyroid cancer is a nodule in the thyroid region of the neck. However, up to 65% of adults have small nodules in their
Most often, the first symptom of thyroid cancer is a nodule in the thyroid region of the neck. However, up to 65% of adults have small nodules in their thyroids, but typically under 10% of these nodules are found to be cancerous. Sometimes, the first
and changes in voice due to an involvement of the recurrent laryngeal nerve.Thyroid cancer is usually found in a euthyroid patient, but symptoms of hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism may be associated with a large or metastatic, well-differentiated tumor.Thyroid nodules are of particular concern when they are
.Environmental exposure to ionizing radiation from both natural background sources and artificial sources is suspected to play a significant role, and significantly increased rates of thyroid cancer occur in those exposed to mantlefield radiation for lymphoma, and those exposed to iodine-131 following the Chernobyl, Fukushima, Kyshtym, and
nodule and assess the status of the whole gland. Some ultrasound results may report a TI-RADS or TIRADS score to categorize the risk of malignancy. Measurement of thyroid stimulating hormone,  free and/or total triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) levels, and antithyroid antibodies
status of the whole gland. Some ultrasound results may report a TI-RADS or TIRADS score to categorize the risk of malignancy. Measurement of thyroid stimulating hormone,  free and/or total triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) levels, and antithyroid antibodies will help decide if
nodule is "hot" or "cold" which may help to make a decision whether to perform a biopsy of the nodule. Measurement of calcitonin is necessary to exclude the presence of medullary thyroid cancer. Finally, to achieve a definitive diagnosis before deciding on treatment, a fine
, a fine needle aspiration cytology test may be performed and reported according to the Bethesda system.After diagnosis, to understand potential for spread of disease, or for follow up monitoring after surgery, a whole body I-131 or I-123 radioactive iodine scan may be performed.In adults without
to their histopathological characteristics. These variants can be distinguished (distribution over various subtypes may show regional variation):Papillary thyroid cancer (75 to 85% of cases) – is more often diagnosed in young females compared to other types of thyroid cancer and has an excellent prognosis. It may occur
may show regional variation):Papillary thyroid cancer (75 to 85% of cases) – is more often diagnosed in young females compared to other types of thyroid cancer and has an excellent prognosis. It may occur in women with familial adenomatous polyposis and in patients with Cowden syndrome. A follicular
thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features is considered an indolent tumor of limited biologic potential.Follicular thyroid cancer (10 to 20% of cases) – occasionally seen in people with Cowden syndrome. Some include Hürthle cell carcinoma as a variant and others list it as a separate
. Some include Hürthle cell carcinoma as a variant and others list it as a separate type.Medullary thyroid cancer (5 to 8% of cases) – cancer of the parafollicular cells, often part of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2.Poorly differentiated thyroid cancerAnaplastic thyroid cancer (less than 5
) – cancer of the parafollicular cells, often part of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2.Poorly differentiated thyroid cancerAnaplastic thyroid cancer (less than 5% of cases) is not responsive to treatment and can cause pressure symptoms.OthersThyroid lymphomaSquamous cell thyroid carcinomaSarcoma of thyroidHürthle cell carcinomaThe follicular and papillary types
thyroid cancer (less than 5% of cases) is not responsive to treatment and can cause pressure symptoms.OthersThyroid lymphomaSquamous cell thyroid carcinomaSarcoma of thyroidHürthle cell carcinomaThe follicular and papillary types together can be classified as "differentiated thyroid cancer". These types have a more favorable prognosis than
Cancer staging is the process of determining the extent of the development of a cancer. The TNM staging system is usually used to classify stages of cancers, but not of the brain.																Detection of any metastases of thyroid cancer can be performed with a full-body scintigraphy using
cancer. The TNM staging system is usually used to classify stages of cancers, but not of the brain.																Detection of any metastases of thyroid cancer can be performed with a full-body scintigraphy using iodine-131.Thyroid cancer can spread directly, via lymphatics or blood. Direct spread occurs
lymph nodes become palpable in papillary carcinoma even when the primary tumor is unpalpable. Deep cervical nodes, pretracheal, prelaryngeal, and paratracheal groups of lymph nodes are often affected. The lymph node affected is usually the same side as that of the location of the tumor. Blood spread
location of the tumor. Blood spread is also possible in thyroid cancers, especially in follicular and anaplastic carcinoma. The tumor emboli do angioinvasion of lungs; end of long bones, skull, and vertebrae are affected. Pulsating metastases occur because of their increased vascularity.Thyroidectomy and dissection
and vertebrae are affected. Pulsating metastases occur because of their increased vascularity.Thyroidectomy and dissection of central neck compartment is initial step in treatment of thyroid cancer in the majority of cases. Thyroid-preserving operations may be applied in cases, when thyroid cancer exhibits low biological aggressiveness (
metastases occur because of their increased vascularity.Thyroidectomy and dissection of central neck compartment is initial step in treatment of thyroid cancer in the majority of cases. Thyroid-preserving operations may be applied in cases, when thyroid cancer exhibits low biological aggressiveness (e.g. well-differentiated cancer,
Thyroid-preserving operations may be applied in cases, when thyroid cancer exhibits low biological aggressiveness (e.g. well-differentiated cancer, no evidence of lymph-node metastases, low MIB-1 index, no major genetic alterations like BRAF mutations, RET/PTC rearrangements, p53 mutations etc.
then surgery is indicated, whereas watchful waiting strategy is not recommended in any evidence-based guidelines.  Watchful waiting reduces overdiagnosis and overtreatment of thyroid cancer among old patients.Radioactive iodine-131 is used in people with papillary or follicular thyroid cancer for ablation of residual thyroid tissue after surgery
patients.Radioactive iodine-131 is used in people with papillary or follicular thyroid cancer for ablation of residual thyroid tissue after surgery and for the treatment of thyroid cancer. Patients with medullary, anaplastic, and most Hurthle-cell cancers do not benefit from this therapy.External irradiation may be
radioactive iodine whole body scans, and routine laboratory blood tests for changes in thyrogolubin, thyroglobuilin antibodies, or calcitonin, depending on the variant of thyroid cancer.The prognosis of thyroid cancer is related to the type of cancer and the stage at the time of diagnosis.  For
and routine laboratory blood tests for changes in thyrogolubin, thyroglobuilin antibodies, or calcitonin, depending on the variant of thyroid cancer.The prognosis of thyroid cancer is related to the type of cancer and the stage at the time of diagnosis.  For the most common form of thyroid
thyrogolubin, thyroglobuilin antibodies, or calcitonin, depending on the variant of thyroid cancer.The prognosis of thyroid cancer is related to the type of cancer and the stage at the time of diagnosis.  For the most common form of thyroid cancer, papillary, the overall prognosis is
depending on the variant of thyroid cancer.The prognosis of thyroid cancer is related to the type of cancer and the stage at the time of diagnosis.  For the most common form of thyroid cancer, papillary, the overall prognosis is excellent. Indeed, the increased incidence of
prognosis of thyroid cancer is related to the type of cancer and the stage at the time of diagnosis.  For the most common form of thyroid cancer, papillary, the overall prognosis is excellent. Indeed, the increased incidence of papillary thyroid carcinoma in recent years is likely related
overdiagnosed cases skews the statistics by lumping clinically significant cases in with apparently harmless cancers.  Thyroid cancer is incredibly common, with autopsy studies of people dying from other causes showing that more than one-third of older adults technically have thyroid cancer, which is causing them no harm
causing them no harm.  Detecting nodules that might be cancerous is easy, simply by feeling the throat, which contributes to the level of overdiagnosis. Benign (noncancerous) nodules frequently co-exist with thyroid cancer; sometimes, a benign nodule is discovered, but surgery uncovers
small thyroid cancer to determine which ones will grow and metastasize and which will not is not possible. As a result, once a diagnosis of thyroid cancer has been established (most commonly by a fine needle aspiration),  a total thyroidectomy likely will be performed.This drive
,  a total thyroidectomy likely will be performed.This drive to earlier diagnosis has also manifested itself on the European continent by the use of serum calcitonin measurements in patients with goiter to identify patients with early abnormalities of the parafollicular or calcitonin-producing cells within the thyroid gland.
have demonstrated, the finding of an elevated serum calcitonin is associated with the finding of a medullary thyroid carcinoma in as high as 20% of cases.In Europe where the threshold for thyroid surgery is lower than in the United States, an elaborate strategy that incorporates serum calcitonin measurements
the same data, have for the most part not incorporated calcitonin testing as a routine part of their evaluations, thereby eliminating a large number of thyroidectomies and the consequent morbidity. The European thyroid community has focused on prevention of metastasis from small medullary thyroid carcinomas; the North American thyroid
routine part of their evaluations, thereby eliminating a large number of thyroidectomies and the consequent morbidity. The European thyroid community has focused on prevention of metastasis from small medullary thyroid carcinomas; the North American thyroid community has focused more on prevention of complications associated with thyroidectomy (see American Thyroid
The European thyroid community has focused on prevention of metastasis from small medullary thyroid carcinomas; the North American thyroid community has focused more on prevention of complications associated with thyroidectomy (see American Thyroid Association guidelines below). As demonstrated in the table below, individuals with stage III and IV
number evolve over years and decades from stage I or II disease. Physicians who manage thyroid cancer of any stage recognize that a small percentage of patients with low-risk thyroid cancer will progress to metastatic disease.Improvements have been made in thyroid cancer treatment during recent years. The
been made in thyroid cancer treatment during recent years. The identification of some of the molecular or DNA abnormalities  has led to the development of therapies that target these molecular defects. The first of these agents to negotiate the approval process is vandetanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets
for those with stage III and IV thyroid cancer.Prognosis is better in younger people than older ones.Prognosis depends mainly on the type of cancer and cancer stage.Thyroid cancer, in 2010, resulted in 36,000 deaths globally up from 24,000 in 1990.  Obesity may be
Thyroid cancer, in 2010, resulted in 36,000 deaths globally up from 24,000 in 1990.  Obesity may be associated with a higher incidence of thyroid cancer, but this relationship remains the subject of much debate.Thyroid cancer accounts for less than 1% of cancer cases and deaths
with a higher incidence of thyroid cancer, but this relationship remains the subject of much debate.Thyroid cancer accounts for less than 1% of cancer cases and deaths in the UK. Around 2,700 people were diagnosed with thyroid cancer in the UK in 2011, and around 370 people

disorders of the immune system. Rheumatology is considered to be the study and practice of medical immunology.Beginning in the 2000s, the incorporation of drugs called the biologics (which include inhibitors of TNF-alpha, certain interleukins, and the JAK-STAT signaling pathway) into standards
drugs called the biologics (which include inhibitors of TNF-alpha, certain interleukins, and the JAK-STAT signaling pathway) into standards of care is one of the paramount developments in modern rheumatology.A rheumatologist is a physician who specializes in the field of medical sub-specialty
 In the United States, training in this field requires four years undergraduate school, four years of medical school, and then three years of residency, followed by two or three years additional Fellowship training. The requirements may vary in other countries. Rheumatologists are internists who are qualified
. The requirements may vary in other countries. Rheumatologists are internists who are qualified by additional postgraduate training and experience in the diagnosis and treatment of arthritis and other diseases of the joints, muscles and bones. Many Rheumatologists also conduct research to determine the cause and better treatments for these
to determine the cause and better treatments for these disabling and sometimes fatal diseases. Treatment modalities are based on scientific research, currently, practice of rheumatology is largely evidence based.Rheumatologists treat arthritis, autoimmune diseases, pain disorders affecting joints, and osteoporosis. There are more than 200
fractures, muscles, nerve entrapment, vascular lesions, and ganglia.  For example:Low back painTennis elbowGolfer's elbowOlecranon bursitisFollowing are examples of methods of diagnosis able to be performed in a normal physical examination.Schober's test tests the flexion of the lower back.Multiple joint
muscles, nerve entrapment, vascular lesions, and ganglia.  For example:Low back painTennis elbowGolfer's elbowOlecranon bursitisFollowing are examples of methods of diagnosis able to be performed in a normal physical examination.Schober's test tests the flexion of the lower back.Multiple joint inspectionMusculoskeletal ExaminationScreening
examination.Schober's test tests the flexion of the lower back.Multiple joint inspectionMusculoskeletal ExaminationScreening Musculoskeletal Exam (SMSE) - a rapid assessment of structure and functionGeneral Musculoskeletal Exam (GMSE) - a comprehensive assessment of joint inflammationRegional Musculoskeletal Exam (RMSE) - focused assessments of structure,
rapid assessment of structure and functionGeneral Musculoskeletal Exam (GMSE) - a comprehensive assessment of joint inflammationRegional Musculoskeletal Exam (RMSE) - focused assessments of structure, function and inflammation combined with special testingLaboratory tests (e.g. Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate, Rheumatoid Factor, Anti-CCP (Anti-citrullinated
), ANA (Anti-Nuclear Antibody) )X-rays, Ultrasounds, and other imaging methods of affected jointsCytopathology and chemical pathology of fluid aspirated from affected joints (e.g. to differentiate between septic arthritis and gout)Most rheumatic diseases are treated with analgesics, NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-
of individual patients. Treatment is often tailored according to the individual needs of each patient which is also dependent on the response and the tolerability of medications.Rheumasurgery - sometimes called rheumatoid surgery - is a subfield of orthopedics occupied with the surgical treatment of patients with rheumatic diseases. The
of each patient which is also dependent on the response and the tolerability of medications.Rheumasurgery - sometimes called rheumatoid surgery - is a subfield of orthopedics occupied with the surgical treatment of patients with rheumatic diseases. The purpose of the interventions is to limit disease activity, soothe pain and
on the response and the tolerability of medications.Rheumasurgery - sometimes called rheumatoid surgery - is a subfield of orthopedics occupied with the surgical treatment of patients with rheumatic diseases. The purpose of the interventions is to limit disease activity, soothe pain and improve function.Rheumasurgical interventions can be
done after destruction has taken place. Among the corrective interventions are joint replacements, removal of loose bone or cartilage fragments, and a variety of interventions aimed at repositioning and/or stabilizing joints, such as arthrodesis.Recently, a large body of scientific research deals with the background of autoimmune
, a large body of scientific research deals with the background of autoimmune disease, the cause of many rheumatic disorders. Also, the field of osteoimmunology has emerged to further examine the interactions between the immune system, joints, and bones. Epidemiological studies and medication trials are also being
, joints, and bones. Epidemiological studies and medication trials are also being conducted. The Rheumatology Research Foundation is the largest private funding source of rheumatology research and training in the United States.Rheumasurgery emerged in the cooperation of rheumatologists and orthopedic surgeons in Heinola, Finland, during the
. The Rheumatology Research Foundation is the largest private funding source of rheumatology research and training in the United States.Rheumasurgery emerged in the cooperation of rheumatologists and orthopedic surgeons in Heinola, Finland, during the 1950s.In 1970 a Norwegian investigation estimated that at least 50% of patients
cooperation of rheumatologists and orthopedic surgeons in Heinola, Finland, during the 1950s.In 1970 a Norwegian investigation estimated that at least 50% of patients with rheumatic symptoms needed rheumasurgery as an integrated part of their treatment.The European Rheumatoid Arthritis Surgical Society (ERASS) was founded in
of their treatment.The European Rheumatoid Arthritis Surgical Society (ERASS) was founded in 1979.Around the turn of the century, focus for treatment of patients with rheumatic disease shifted, and pharmacological treatment became dominant, while surgical interventions became rarer.Association des medecins rhumatologues du QuebecAmerican College of
the proximal convoluted tubule, a part of the very small tubes in the kidney that transport primary urine. RCC is the most common type of kidney cancer in adults, responsible for approximately 90–95% of cases. RCC occurrence shows a male predomiance over women with a ratio of 1.5:1
tubes in the kidney that transport primary urine. RCC is the most common type of kidney cancer in adults, responsible for approximately 90–95% of cases. RCC occurrence shows a male predomiance over women with a ratio of 1.5:1. RCC most commonly occurs between 6th and 7th decade of
of cases. RCC occurrence shows a male predomiance over women with a ratio of 1.5:1. RCC most commonly occurs between 6th and 7th decade of life.Initial treatment is most commonly either partial or complete removal of the affected kidney(s). Where the cancer has not metastasised (spread
also associated with a number of paraneoplastic syndromes (PNS) which are conditions caused by either the hormones produced by the tumour or by the body's attack on the tumour and are present in about 20% of those with RCC. These syndromes most commonly affect tissues which have not been
associated with a number of paraneoplastic syndromes (PNS) which are conditions caused by either the hormones produced by the tumour or by the body's attack on the tumour and are present in about 20% of those with RCC. These syndromes most commonly affect tissues which have not been
the hip and ribs, and 3: an abdominal mass, similar to bloating but larger. It is now known that this classic triad of symptoms only occurs in 10–15% of cases, and is usually indicative that the renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is in an advanced stage
: an abdominal mass, similar to bloating but larger. It is now known that this classic triad of symptoms only occurs in 10–15% of cases, and is usually indicative that the renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is in an advanced stage. Today, RCC is often asymptomatic
examined for other ailments.Other signs and symptom may include haematuria; loin pain; abdominal mass; malaise, which is a general feeling of unwellness; weight loss and/or loss of appetite; anaemia resulting from depression of erythropoietin; erythrocytosis (increased production of red blood cells) due
and symptom may include haematuria; loin pain; abdominal mass; malaise, which is a general feeling of unwellness; weight loss and/or loss of appetite; anaemia resulting from depression of erythropoietin; erythrocytosis (increased production of red blood cells) due to increased erythropoietin secretion; varicocele,
pain; abdominal mass; malaise, which is a general feeling of unwellness; weight loss and/or loss of appetite; anaemia resulting from depression of erythropoietin; erythrocytosis (increased production of red blood cells) due to increased erythropoietin secretion; varicocele, which is seen in males as an
production of red blood cells) due to increased erythropoietin secretion; varicocele, which is seen in males as an enlargement of the pampiniform plexus of veins draining the testis (more often the left testis) hypertension (high blood pressure) resulting from secretion of renin by the tumour;
enlargement of the pampiniform plexus of veins draining the testis (more often the left testis) hypertension (high blood pressure) resulting from secretion of renin by the tumour; hypercalcemia, which is elevation of calcium levels in the blood; sleep disturbance or night sweats; recurrent fevers;
more often the left testis) hypertension (high blood pressure) resulting from secretion of renin by the tumour; hypercalcemia, which is elevation of calcium levels in the blood; sleep disturbance or night sweats; recurrent fevers; and chronic fatigue.The greatest risk factors for RCC are
RCC are lifestyle-related; smoking, obesity and hypertension (high blood pressure) have been estimated to account for up to 50% of cases.Occupational exposure to some chemicals such as asbestos, cadmium, lead, chlorinated solvents, petrochemicals and PAH (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon)
shown to have a protective effect. The reason for this remains unclear.Hereditary factors have a minor impact on individual susceptibility with immediate relatives of people with RCC having a two to fourfold increased risk of developing the condition. Other genetically linked conditions also increase the risk of RCC,
subtypes: sporadic (that is, non-hereditary) and hereditary. Both such subtypes are associated with mutations in the short-arm of chromosome 3, with the implicated genes being either tumour suppressor genes (VHL and TSC) or oncogenes (like c-Met).The first steps
, palpation of the abdomen may reveal the presence of a mass or an organ enlargement.Although this disease lacks characterization in the early stages of tumor development, considerations based on diverse clinical manifestations, as well as resistance to radiation and chemotherapy are important. The main diagnostic tools for
(MRI) of the kidneys.Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is not a single entity, but rather a collection of different types of tumours, each derived from the various parts of the nephron (epithelium or renal tubules) and possessing distinct genetic characteristics, histological features,
are discovered. Laboratory analysis can provide an assessment on the overall health of the patient and can provide information in determining the staging and degree of metastasis to other parts of the body (if a renal lesion has been identified) before treatment is given. Urine analysis The presence of
of metastasis to other parts of the body (if a renal lesion has been identified) before treatment is given. Urine analysis The presence of blood in urine is a common presumptive sign of renal cell carcinoma. The haemoglobin of the blood causes the urine to be rusty, brown
cell carcinoma is anaemia whereby the patient exhibits deficiency in red blood cells. CBC tests are vital as a screening tool for examination the health of patient prior to surgery. Inconsistencies with platelet counts are also common amongst these cancer patients and further coagulation tests, including Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (
aminotransferase (ALT) are found to be at abnormally high levels. The staging of the cancer can also be determined by abnormal elevated levels of calcium, which suggests that the cancer may have metastasised to the bones. In this case, a doctor should be prompted for a CT
but cystic renal masses may also be due to RCC. However, the advances of diagnostic modalities are able to incidentally diagnose a great proportion of patients with renal lesions that may appear to be small in size and of benign state. Ten percent of RCC will contain calcifications, and
interior image of the body on a computer monitor. The image generated by the ultrasound can help diagnose renal cell carcinoma based on the differences of sound reflections on the surface of organs and the abnormal tissue masses. Essentially, ultrasound tests can determine whether the composition of the kidney mass
a computer monitor. The image generated by the ultrasound can help diagnose renal cell carcinoma based on the differences of sound reflections on the surface of organs and the abnormal tissue masses. Essentially, ultrasound tests can determine whether the composition of the kidney mass is mainly solid or filled with
with fluid.A Percutaneous biopsy can be performed by a radiologist using ultrasound or computed tomography to guide sampling of the tumour for the purpose of diagnosis by pathology. However this is not routinely performed because when the typical imaging features of renal cell carcinoma are present, the possibility of
which has grown in major blood vessels, including the vena cava, in the abdomen. MRI can be used to observe the possible spread of cancer to the brain or spinal cord should the patient present symptoms that suggest this might be the case. Intravenous pyelogram Intravenous pyelogram (IVP
not necessary if a CT or MRI scan has been conducted. Renal angiography Renal angiography uses the same principle as IVP, as this type of X-ray also uses a contrasting dye. This radiologic test is important in diagnosing renal cell carcinoma as an aid for examining blood vessels
clearer outline of abnormally-oriented blood vessels believed to be involved with the tumour.  This is imperative for surgeons as it allows the patient's blood vessels to be mapped prior to operation.The staging of renal cell carcinoma is the most important factor in predicting its prognosis. Staging
outline of abnormally-oriented blood vessels believed to be involved with the tumour.  This is imperative for surgeons as it allows the patient's blood vessels to be mapped prior to operation.The staging of renal cell carcinoma is the most important factor in predicting its prognosis. Staging
in predicting its prognosis. Staging can follow the TNM staging system, where the size and extent of the tumour (T), involvement of lymph nodes (N) and metastases (M) are classified separately. Also, it can use overall stage grouping into stage I–
that have walls composed of cancerous cells.Gross examination often shows a yellowish, multilobulated tumor in the renal cortex, which frequently contains zones of necrosis, haemorrhage and scarring. In a microscopic context, there are four major histologic subtypes of renal cell cancer: clear cell (conventional
papillary (15%), chromophobic (5%), and collecting duct (2%). Sarcomatoid changes (morphology and patterns of IHC that mimic sarcoma, spindle cells) can be observed within any RCC subtype and are associated with more aggressive clinical course and worse prognosis
are thought to be the least likely to spread and usually respond more favourably to treatment. However, most of the tumours contain a mixture of cells. The most aggressive stage of renal cancer is believed to be the one in which the tumour is mixed, containing both clear and
has shown that the Fuhrman grading is ideal for clear cell carcinoma but may not be appropriate for chromophobe renal cell carcinomas and that the staging of cancer (accomplished by CT scan) is a more favourable predictor of the prognosis of this disease. In relation to renal cancer staging,
histopathological features with the identified genetic defects.The risk of renal cell carcinoma can be reduced by maintaining a normal body weight.The type of treatment depends on multiple factors and the individual, some of which include the stage of renal cell carcinoma (organs and parts of the body
unaffected), type of renal cell carcinoma, pre-existing or comorbid conditions and overall health and age of the person.Every form of treatment has both risks and benefits; a health care professional will provide the best options that suit the individual circumstances.If it has spread
may include some of the surrounding organs or tissues or lymph nodes. If cancer is only in the kidneys, which is about 60% of cases, it can be cured roughly 90% of the time with surgery.Small renal tumors (< 4 cm) are treated increasingly
can have positive long term health benefits.  Larger and more complex tumors can also be treated with partial nephrectomy by surgeons with a lot of kidney surgery experience.Surgical nephrectomy may be "radical" if the procedure removes the entire affected kidney including Gerota's fascia, the adrenal
This method, although severe, is effective. But it is not always appropriate, as it is a major surgery that contains the risk of complication both during and after the surgery and can have a longer recovery time.  It is important to note that the other kidney must
laparoscopically with or without robotic assistance.Laparoscopic cryotherapy can also be done on smaller lesions.  Typically a biopsy is taken at the time of treatment. Intraoperative ultrasound may be used to help guide placement of the freezing probes. Two freeze/thaw cycles are then performed to kill
can still occur, and in some cases, if the metastasis is small this can also be surgically removed. This depends on what stage of growth and how far the disease has spread.Percutaneous ablation therapies use image-guidance by radiologists to treat localized tumors if a surgical procedure
surgery in that pathologic confirmation of complete tumor destruction is not possible. Therefore, long-term follow-up is crucial to assess completeness of tumour ablation. Ideally, percutaneous ablation is restricted to tumours smaller than 3.5 cm and to guide the treatment. However, there are some
to guide the treatment. However, there are some cases where ablation can be used on tumors that are larger.The two main types of ablation techniques that are used for renal cell carcinoma are radio frequency ablation and cryoablation.Radio frequency ablation  uses an electrode probe which is
 uses an electrode probe which is inserted into the affected tissue, to send radio frequencies to the tissue to generate heat through the friction of water molecules. The heat destroys the tumor tissue.  Cell death will generally occur within minutes of being exposed to temperatures above 50 °
a person's immune response to cancer cells.Other targeted therapy medications inhibit growth factors that have been shown to promote the growth and spread of tumours. Most of these medications were approved within the past ten years. These treatments are:Activity has also been reported for ipilimumab but
has been shown to decrease the size and stage of the RCC to then allow it to be surgically removed. This is a new form of treatment and the effectiveness of this approach is still being assessed in clinical trials.Metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) is the spread of
.Metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) is the spread of the primary renal cell carcinoma from the kidney to other organs. 25–30% of people have this metastatic spread by the time they are diagnosed with renal cell carcinoma. This high proportion is explained by the fact that clinical
and axitinib). These new treatments are based on the fact that renal cell carcinomas are very vascular tumors – they contain a large number of blood vessels. The drugs aim to inhibit the growth of new blood vessels in the tumors, hence slowing growth and in some cases reducing
skin and mucus membranes – rashes, hand-foot syndrome, stomatitisBone marrow suppression – resulting in reduced white blood cells, increasing the risk of infections plus anemia and reduced plateletsRenal effects – impaired kidney functionFatigue.Radiotherapy and chemotherapy are more commonly used in the metastatic form of RCC to
bones, liver, brain and other organs. While not curative, these treatments do provide relief for suffers from symptoms associated with the spread of tumors.The prognosis is influenced by several factors, including tumour size, degree of invasion and metastasis, histologic type, and nuclear grade
provide relief for suffers from symptoms associated with the spread of tumors.The prognosis is influenced by several factors, including tumour size, degree of invasion and metastasis, histologic type, and nuclear grade. Staging is the most important factor in the outcome of renal cell cancer. The
, younger people (among 20–40 years old) have a better outcome despite having more symptoms at presentation, possibly due to lower rates spread of cancer to the lymph nodes (stage III).Histological grade is related to the aggressiveness of the cancer, and it is classified in 4 grades,
performance-status score (a standard way of measuring functional impairment in patients with cancer), a low haemoglobin level, a high level of serum lactate dehydrogenase, and a high corrected level of serum calcium. For non-metastatic cases, the Leibovich scoring algorithm may be used
functional impairment in patients with cancer), a low haemoglobin level, a high level of serum lactate dehydrogenase, and a high corrected level of serum calcium. For non-metastatic cases, the Leibovich scoring algorithm may be used to predict post-operative disease progression.Renal cell
geographic location around the world. Men have a higher incidence than women (approximately 1.6:1) and the vast majority are diagnosed after 65 years of age. Asians reportedly have a significantly lower incidence of RCC than whites and while African countries have the lowest reported incidences, African Americans have
, a 35-year-old woman, who presented to Brest Civic Hospital on April 6, 1809, supposedly in the late stages of pregnancy.Koenig published the first classification of renal tumours based on macroscopic morphology in 1826. Koenig divided the tumors into scirrhous, steatomatous,
divided the tumors into scirrhous, steatomatous, fungoid and medullary forms.Following the classification of the tumour, researchers attempted to identify the tissue of origin for renal carcinoma.The pathogenesis of renal epithelial tumours was debated for decades. The debate was initiated by Paul Grawitz when in 1883
in 1959 who studied the ultrastructure of clear cells from eight renal carcinomas. They found that the tumour cell cytoplasm contained numerous mitochondria and deposits of glycogen and fat. They identified cytoplasmic membranes inserted perpendicularly onto the basement membrane with occasional cells containing microvilli along the free borders. They concluded
or swelling in the affected gland which may or may not have been present for a long time. The lump may be accompanied by symptoms of duct blockage (e.g. xerostomia). Usually, in their early stages it is not possible to distinguish a benign tumour from a malignant one
it is benign or malignant. Examples of diagnostic methods include:Physical exam and history: An exam of the body to check general signs of health. The head, neck, mouth, and throat will be checked for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that
An exam of the body to check general signs of health. The head, neck, mouth, and throat will be checked for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient's health habits and past illnesses and treatments will
mouth, and throat will be checked for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient's health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken.Endoscopy: A procedure to look at organs and tissues inside the body to
, and throat will be checked for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient's health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken.Endoscopy: A procedure to look at organs and tissues inside the body to
tests can confirm the presence of a tumour. An MRI or CT Scan can also show whether metastasis has occurred.Biopsy: The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer.Fine needle aspiration (FNA
has occurred.Biopsy: The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer.Fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy: The removal of tissue or fluid using a thin needle. An FNA is the most
can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer.Fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy: The removal of tissue or fluid using a thin needle. An FNA is the most common type of biopsy used for salivary gland cancer, and has been
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy: The removal of tissue or fluid using a thin needle. An FNA is the most common type of biopsy used for salivary gland cancer, and has been shown to produce accurate results when differentiating between benign and malignant tumours.Radiographs: An
proposed by the World Health Organization in 2005, which classifies salivary neoplasms as primary or secondary, benign or malignant, and also by tissue of origin. This system defines five broad categories of salivary gland neoplasms:Benign epithelial tumorsPleomorphic adenomaWarthin's tumorMyoepitheliomaBasal cell adenomaOncocytomaCanalicular adenomaLymphadenomaSebaceous lymphadenomaNonsebaceous lymphadenomaDuctal papillomaInverted ductal
benign or malignant, and also by tissue of origin. This system defines five broad categories of salivary gland neoplasms:Benign epithelial tumorsPleomorphic adenomaWarthin's tumorMyoepitheliomaBasal cell adenomaOncocytomaCanalicular adenomaLymphadenomaSebaceous lymphadenomaNonsebaceous lymphadenomaDuctal papillomaInverted ductal papillomaIntraductal papillomaSialadenoma papilliferumCystadenomaMalignant epithelial tumorsAcinic cell carcinomaMucoepidermoid carcinomaAdenoid cystic carcinomaPolymorphous low-grade adenocarcinomaEpithelial-myoepithelial carcinomaClear cell
or unresectable cancers tend to be treated with radiotherapy (RT) alone or chemoradiotherapy (CRT), which hampered the comparison of the efficacy of RT alone with that of surgery combined with adjuvant RT. But some effort had been made to reflect the role of surgery in salivary gland
comparison of the efficacy of RT alone with that of surgery combined with adjuvant RT. But some effort had been made to reflect the role of surgery in salivary gland tumours.Treatment may include the following:Surgery Complete surgical resection, with adequate free margins, is currently the mainstay
and has shown to be significantly more effective than photons in studies treating unresectable salivary gland tumors.Chemotherapy Currently little is known about the efficacy of chemotherapy in treating salivary gland tumours. Chemotherapy, which plays an important role in systemic therapy, is generally reserved for the palliative treatment of
androgen receptors are the most commonly investigated molecular targets in SGCs. Their expression seems not to be linked to its pathogenetic role in the development of SGCs, but more to the histogenetic origin of the tumor cells. Various targeted agents, such as imatinib, cetuximab, gefitinib, trastuzumab
had been used for exploring new treatment for salivary gland tumours, but on account of the rare incidence of salivary gland tumours, the number of cases available on targeted therapy for analysis is relatively small.Little is known about the total incidence of salivary gland tumours as most benign tumours
national cancer registries. The majority of salivary tumours are benign (65-70%). Within the parotid gland 75 - 80% of tumours are benign. Around 50% of the tumours found in the submandibular glands are benign. Sublingual gland tumours are very rare but if
, women with BRCA1/2 mutation have a 5% risk of developing primary peritoneal cancer even after prophylactic oophorectomy.Primary peritoneal carcinoma shows similar rates of tumor suppressor gene dysfunction (p53, BRCA, WT1) as ovarian cancer and can also show an increased expression of HER-2/neu.
, secretory and motor fibres to the cervical segments of the esophagus and the trachea.The recurrent laryngeal nerves may be injured as a result of trauma, during surgery, as a result of tumour spread, or due to other means. Injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerves can result
of the esophagus and the trachea.The recurrent laryngeal nerves may be injured as a result of trauma, during surgery, as a result of tumour spread, or due to other means. Injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerves can result in a weakened voice (hoarseness) or loss
tumour spread, or due to other means. Injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerves can result in a weakened voice (hoarseness) or loss of voice (aphonia) and cause problems in the respiratory tract. Injury to the nerve may paralyze the posterior cricoarytenoid muscle on the same side
thyroid and parathyroid surgery; as well as esophagectomy. Nerve damage can be assessed by laryngoscopy, during which a stroboscopic light confirms the absence of movement in the affected side of the vocal cords. The right recurrent laryngeal nerve is more susceptible to damage during thyroid surgery because it is
right inferior thyroid artery, variably passing in front of, behind, or between the branches. The nerve is permanently damaged in 0.3–3% of thyroid surgeries, and transient paralysis occurs in 3–8% of surgeries; accordingly, recurrent laryngeal nerve damage is one of the leading causes of
behind, or between the branches. The nerve is permanently damaged in 0.3–3% of thyroid surgeries, and transient paralysis occurs in 3–8% of surgeries; accordingly, recurrent laryngeal nerve damage is one of the leading causes of medicolegal issues for surgeons.The RLN may be compressed by
is one of the leading causes of medicolegal issues for surgeons.The RLN may be compressed by tumors. Studies have shown that 2–18% of lung cancer patients develop hoarseness because of recurrent laryngeal nerve compression, usually left-sided. This is associated with worse outcomes, and when
remove a tumor. The RLN may also be damaged by tumors in the neck, especially with malignant lymph nodes with extra-capsular extension of tumor beyond the capsule of the nodes, which may invade the area that carries the ascending nerve on the right or left.In Ortner
nerve on the right or left.In Ortner's syndrome or cardiovocal syndrome, a rare cause of left recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy, expansion of structures within the heart or major blood vessels impinges upon the nerve, causing symptoms of unilateral nerve injury.Horses are subject to equine recurrent
the airway open. Experiments with nerve grafts have been tried.Although uncommon in dogs, bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve disease may be the cause of wheezing (stridor) when middle-aged dogs inhale.In sauropod dinosaurs, the vertebrates with the longest necks, the total length of
would have exceeded 30 metres (98 ft).The extreme detour of the recurrent laryngeal nerves, about 4.6 metres (15 ft) in the case of giraffes, is cited as evidence of evolution, as opposed to Intelligent Design. The nerve's route would have been direct in the fish
ft).The extreme detour of the recurrent laryngeal nerves, about 4.6 metres (15 ft) in the case of giraffes, is cited as evidence of evolution, as opposed to Intelligent Design. The nerve's route would have been direct in the fish-like ancestors of modern tetrapods,
metres (15 ft) in the case of giraffes, is cited as evidence of evolution, as opposed to Intelligent Design. The nerve's route would have been direct in the fish-like ancestors of modern tetrapods, traveling from the brain, past the heart, to the
tetrapods, traveling from the brain, past the heart, to the gills (as it does in modern fish). Over the course of evolution, as the neck extended and the heart became lower in the body, the laryngeal nerve was caught on the wrong side of the
the same effect in two human infants who had undergone surgery for goiter.  In 1838, five years before he would introduce the concept of homology to biology, anatomist Richard Owen reported upon the dissection of three giraffes, including a description of the full course of the left recurrent
yam, tannia and corn. Saladoid cultural traditions were later modified by the introduction of the Barrancoid culture, either by trade or a combination of trade and settlement. After 650 CE, the Saladoid culture was replaced by the Troumassoid tradition in Tobago. Troumassoid traditions were once thought to
Cayo ceramic tradition. No archaeological sites exclusively associated with the Cayo tradition are known from Tobago.Tobago's location made it an important point of connection between the Kalinago of the Lesser Antilles and their Kalina allies and trading partners in the Guianas and Venezuela. In the 1630s Tobago was
slave raids against the island in a royal order issued in 1511. These raids, which continued until at least the 1620s, decimated the island's population.In 1628, Dutch settlers established the first European settlement in Tobago, a colony they called Nieuw Walcheren at Great Courland Bay.
raids against the island in a royal order issued in 1511. These raids, which continued until at least the 1620s, decimated the island's population.In 1628, Dutch settlers established the first European settlement in Tobago, a colony they called Nieuw Walcheren at Great Courland Bay.
Duchy of Courland),  Dutch, English, French, Spanish and Swedish had caused Tobago to become a focal point in repeated attempts of colonisation, which led to the island having changed hands 33 times, the most in Caribbean history, before the Treaty of Paris ceded it
yet again took control of the island.From about 1672, during the temporary British rule of 1672-1674, Tobago had a period of stability during which plantation culture began. Sugar, cotton and indigo factories sprang up and Africans were imported by the British to work as slaves
work as slaves. The economy flourished. France had abandoned the island to Britain in 1763, and by 1777 Tobago was exporting great quantities of cotton, indigo, rum and sugar. But in 1781, the French re-invaded Tobago, and destroyed the plantations, and forced
again came under British control, another phase of successful sugar-production began. But a severe hurricane in 1847, combined with the collapse of plantation underwriters, end of slavery in 1834 and the competition from sugar with other European countries, marked the end of the sugar trade.
, another phase of successful sugar-production began. But a severe hurricane in 1847, combined with the collapse of plantation underwriters, end of slavery in 1834 and the competition from sugar with other European countries, marked the end of the sugar trade. In 1889 the island became
sugar trade. In 1889 the island became a ward of Trinidad. Without sugar, the islanders had to grow other crops, planting acres of limes, coconuts and cocoa and exporting their produce to Trinidad. In 1963 Hurricane Flora ravaged Tobago, destroying the villages and crops. A
main island's northeast tip.The southwestern tourist area around Crown Point, Store Bay, Buccoo Reef, and Pigeon Point has large expanses of sand and is dominated by resort-type developments. Tobago has many idyllic beaches along its coastline, especially those at Castara, Bloody Bay
a 200-foot tall saman in the Goldsborough Bay area. After filming, locals convinced Disney, who had intended to remove all evidence of filmmaking, to let the treehouse remain, sans interior furnishing. In 1960, the treehouse was listed for sale for $9,000, a
resident says, "The tree has fallen into obscurity; only a few of the older people knew of its significance. As a matter of fact, not many people know of the film Swiss Family Robinson, much less that it was filmed here in Tobago."Tobago is also
in Britain responsible for Tobago's development. It has remained a protected area since.This forested area has great biodiversity, including many species of birds (such as the dancing blue-backed manakin), mammals, frogs, (non-venomous) snakes, butterflies and other
), mammals, frogs, (non-venomous) snakes, butterflies and other invertebrates. It is one of the most approachable areas of rainforest, since it is relatively small and there are government-appointed guides who provide an authoritative guiding service through the forest at a reasonable
may be birth defects resulting from errors during development of the embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information
embryo.Some investigators suggest that this distribution arises as a consequence of abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. Others hypothesize a widespread distribution of germ cells to multiple sites during normal embryogenesis, with these cells conveying genetic information or providing regulatory functions at somatic sites.Extragonadal GCTs were
classes reflect an important clinical difference. Compared to germinomatous tumors, nongerminomatous tumors tend to grow faster, have an earlier mean age at time of diagnosis ( around 25 years versus 35 years, in the case of testicular cancers), and have a lower five-year survival rate
radiation, and they also respond well to chemotherapy.  The prognosis for nongerminomatous tumours has improved dramatically, however, due to the use of platinum-based chemotherapy regimens.Mixed germ cell tumors occur in many forms.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal
.  Among these, a common form is teratoma with endodermal sinus tumor.Teratocarcinoma refers to a germ cell tumor that is a mixture of teratoma with embryonal carcinoma, or with choriocarcinoma, or with both.  This kind of mixed germ cell tumor may be known simply as
neonates, infants, and children younger than 4 years, most are sacrococcygeal teratomas.Males with Klinefelter syndrome have a 50 times greater risk of GSTs.  In these persons, GSTs usually contain nonseminomatous elements, present at an earlier age, and seldom are gonadal in location.
are being evaluated for tumors that do not respond to chemotherapy.The 1997 International Germ Cell Consensus Classification is a tool for estimating the risk of relapse after treatment of malignant germ-cell tumor.A small study of ovarian tumors in girls reports a correlation between cystic and benign tumors
can be estimated by ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan before surgery, this permits selection of the most appropriate surgical plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found
plan to minimize risk of spillage of a malignant tumor.Access to appropriate treatment has a large effect on outcome.  A 1993 study of outcomes in Scotland found that for 454 men with nonseminomatous (nongerminomatous) GCTs diagnosed between 1975 and 1989, five-year survival increased over
tract. Compared to non-small cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma has a shorter doubling time, higher growth fraction, and earlier development of metastases.Extensive stage small cell lung cancer is classified as a rare disorder. Ten-year relative survival rate is 3.5%; however
have a higher survival rate, 4.3%, and men lower, 2.8%. Survival can be higher or lower based on a combination of factors including stage, age, gender and race.Small-cell lung carcinoma has long been divided into two clinicopathological stages, including limited
clinicopathological stages, including limited stage (LS) and extensive stage (ES). The stage is generally determined by the presence or absence of metastases, whether or not the tumor appears limited to the thorax, and whether or not the entire tumor burden within the chest can feasibly
RR) of between 60% and 90% are seen in LS-SCLC using chemotherapy alone, with between 45% and 75% of individuals showing a "complete response" (CR), which is defined as the disappearance of all radiological and clinical signs of tumor.
75% of individuals showing a "complete response" (CR), which is defined as the disappearance of all radiological and clinical signs of tumor. However, relapse rate remains high, and median survival is only 18 to 24 months.Because SCLC usually metastasizes widely very early
surgical excision may improve survival when used prior to chemotherapy ("adjuvant chemotherapy").In ES-SCLC, platinum-based combination chemotherapy is the standard of care, with radiotherapy added only to palliate symptoms such as dyspnea, pain from liver or bone metastases, or for treatment of brain metastases
the standard of care, with radiotherapy added only to palliate symptoms such as dyspnea, pain from liver or bone metastases, or for treatment of brain metastases, which, in small-cell lung carcinoma, typically have a rapid, if temporary, response to whole brain radiotherapy.
-cell lung carcinoma, typically have a rapid, if temporary, response to whole brain radiotherapy.Combination chemotherapy consists of a wide variety of agents, including cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine and carboplatin. Response rates are high even in extensive disease, with between 15% and 30
, including cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine and carboplatin. Response rates are high even in extensive disease, with between 15% and 30% of subjects having a complete response to combination chemotherapy, and the vast majority having at least some objective response. Responses in ES-SCLC are
vast majority having at least some objective response. Responses in ES-SCLC are often of short duration, and the evidence surrounding the risk of treatment compared to the potential benefit of chemotherapy for people who have extensive SCLC is not clear.If complete response to chemotherapy occurs in a
response. Responses in ES-SCLC are often of short duration, and the evidence surrounding the risk of treatment compared to the potential benefit of chemotherapy for people who have extensive SCLC is not clear.If complete response to chemotherapy occurs in a subject with SCLC, then prophylactic cranial
to chemotherapy occurs in a subject with SCLC, then prophylactic cranial irradiation (PCI) is often used in an attempt to prevent the emergence of brain metastases. Although this treatment is often effective, it can cause hair loss and fatigue. Prospective randomized trials with almost two years follow
treat patients with metastatic small cell lung cancer (SCLC) who failed to respond to platinum-based chemotherapy and at least one other line of treatment. Nivolumab is approved in more than 60 countries. According to LUNGevity Foundation, “This approval marks a major milestone for the patients
the submucosa leading to narrowing of bronchial airways. Common symptoms include cough, dyspnea, weight loss, and debility.  Over 70% of patients with small-cell carcinoma present with metastatic disease; common sites include liver, adrenals, bone, and brain.Due to its
due to the flat cell shape and scanty cytoplasm. Caution is required when diagnosing SCLC, because small cell mesothelioma – an extremely rare subtype of lung cancer – can be mistaken for small cell lung cancer.It is thought to originate from neuroendocrine cells (APUD cells) in the
in the bronchus called Feyrter cells (named for Friedrich Feyrter).Hence, they express a variety of neuroendocrine markers, and may lead to ectopic production of hormones like ADH and ACTH that may result in paraneoplastic syndromes and Cushing's syndrome. Approximately half of all individuals diagnosed with Lambert-Eaton
its metastatic progression are not well-understood.Small-cell lung carcinoma can occur in combination with a wide variety of other histological variants of lung cancer, including extremely complex malignant tissue admixtures.When it is found with one or more differentiated forms of lung cancer, such as
variety of other histological variants of lung cancer, including extremely complex malignant tissue admixtures.When it is found with one or more differentiated forms of lung cancer, such as squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma, the malignant tumor is then diagnosed and classified as a combined small cell lung carcinoma
rates are much higher than other small-cell carcinomas.In the prostate, small-cell carcinoma (SCCP) is a rare form of cancer (approx 1% of PC). Due to the fact that there is little variation in prostate specific antigen levels, this form
cancer (approx 1% of PC). Due to the fact that there is little variation in prostate specific antigen levels, this form of cancer is normally diagnosed at an advanced stage, after metastasis.It can metastasize to the brain.TP53 is mutated in 70 to 90
is normally diagnosed at an advanced stage, after metastasis.It can metastasize to the brain.TP53 is mutated in 70 to 90% of SCLCs. RB1 and the retinoblastoma pathway are inactivated in most SCLCs. PTEN is mutated in 2 to 10%. MYC amplifications and amplification
in most SCLCs. PTEN is mutated in 2 to 10%. MYC amplifications and amplification of MYC family members are found in 30% of SCLCs. Loss of heterozygocity on chromosome arm 3p is found in more than 80% of SCLCs, including the loss of FHIT. One
PTEN is mutated in 2 to 10%. MYC amplifications and amplification of MYC family members are found in 30% of SCLCs. Loss of heterozygocity on chromosome arm 3p is found in more than 80% of SCLCs, including the loss of FHIT. One hundred translocations have so
of MYC family members are found in 30% of SCLCs. Loss of heterozygocity on chromosome arm 3p is found in more than 80% of SCLCs, including the loss of FHIT. One hundred translocations have so far been reported in SCLCs (see the "Mitelman Database" and
lung.Distant: the cancer has spread (or metastasized) to other parts of the body (aka: extensive stage SCLC).At the time of diagnosis, 60–70% of people already have metastases.Small-cell carcinoma is an undifferentiated neoplasm composed of primitive-appearing cells. As
cancer has spread (or metastasized) to other parts of the body (aka: extensive stage SCLC).At the time of diagnosis, 60–70% of people already have metastases.Small-cell carcinoma is an undifferentiated neoplasm composed of primitive-appearing cells. As the name implies, the
effective than one drug alone.Cisplatin and etoposide,Carboplatin and etoposide. Cisplatin-resistance The drug paclitaxel may be useful in the treatment of cisplatin-resistant cancer. About 68.1% of cisplatin-resistant cellsappear to be sensitive to paclitaxel and 66.7% of paclitaxel-resistant cells
,Carboplatin and etoposide. Cisplatin-resistance The drug paclitaxel may be useful in the treatment of cisplatin-resistant cancer. About 68.1% of cisplatin-resistant cellsappear to be sensitive to paclitaxel and 66.7% of paclitaxel-resistant cells tocisplatin. The mechanism for this activity is unknown
useful in the treatment of cisplatin-resistant cancer. About 68.1% of cisplatin-resistant cellsappear to be sensitive to paclitaxel and 66.7% of paclitaxel-resistant cells tocisplatin. The mechanism for this activity is unknown. Paclitaxel-based chemotherapy showed modest activity in SCLC patients refractory to
by United Kingdom also citing "drug’s cost-effectiveness."Chest radiation helps SCLC patients live longer by killing cancer cells and helping prevention of cancer recurrence. Another type of radiation, prophylactic cranial radiation, prevents central nervous system recurrence and can improve survival in patients with good performance
drug’s cost-effectiveness."Chest radiation helps SCLC patients live longer by killing cancer cells and helping prevention of cancer recurrence. Another type of radiation, prophylactic cranial radiation, prevents central nervous system recurrence and can improve survival in patients with good performance status who have had a complete
or a very good partial response to chemoradiation in LD or chemotherapy in ED.If small cell lung cancer comes back after treatment, the following combination of drugs may be used as a salvage therapy:Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan, Procytox),Doxorubicin (Adriamycin) andVincristine (Oncovin)Paclitaxel (Taxol)Irinotecan (Camptosar) Current
.The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates based on age, sex, and race and is considered the most accurate source of survival information. This database uses terms "Localized," "Regional," and "Distant" to describe various stages of small cell
diagnosis) | Distant (ES SCLC) | = 6.1% National Cancer Institute's SEER maintains publicly accessible database for specific survival rates.15% of lung cancers in the US are of this type. Small cell lung cancer occurs almost exclusively in smokers – most commonly in heavy smokers and
Symptoms range from isolated bone lesions to multisystem disease.Symptoms range from isolated bone lesions to multisystem disease. LCH is part of a group of syndromes called histiocytoses, which are characterized by an abnormal proliferation of histiocytes (an archaic term for activated dendritic cells and macrophages). These
from isolated bone lesions to multisystem disease. LCH is part of a group of syndromes called histiocytoses, which are characterized by an abnormal proliferation of histiocytes (an archaic term for activated dendritic cells and macrophages). These diseases are related to other forms of abnormal proliferation of white blood
birth) and histiocytosis X, until it was renamed in 1985 by the Histiocyte Society.The disease spectrum results from clonal accumulation and proliferation of cells resembling the epidermal dendritic cells called Langerhans cells, sometimes called dendritic cell histiocytosis. These cells in combination with lymphocytes, eosinophils, and
in combination with lymphocytes, eosinophils, and normal histiocytes form typical LCH lesions that can be found in almost any organ. A similar set of diseases has been described in canine histiocytic diseases.LCH is clinically divided into three groups: unifocal, multifocal unisystem, and multifocal multisystem.
found in the skin, lungs, or stomach. It can appear as a single lesion in an organ, up to a large quantity of lesions in one organ. When multiple lesions are scattered throughout an organ, it can be called a multifocal unisystem variety. When found in
be called a multifocal unisystem variety. When found in the lungs, it should be distinguished from Pulmonary Langerhans cell hystiocytosis—a special category of disease most commonly seen in adult smokers. When found in the skin it is called cutaneous single system Langerhans cell LCH. This version can
multifocal unisystem LCH is characterized by fever, bone lesions and diffuse eruptions, usually on the scalp and in the ear canals. 50% of cases involve the pituitary stalk, often leading to diabetes insipidus. The triad of diabetes insipidus, exophthalmos, and lytic bone lesions is known
on the scalp and in the ear canals. 50% of cases involve the pituitary stalk, often leading to diabetes insipidus. The triad of diabetes insipidus, exophthalmos, and lytic bone lesions is known as the Hand-Schüller-Christian triad. Peak onset is 2–10 years of
of diabetes insipidus, exophthalmos, and lytic bone lesions is known as the Hand-Schüller-Christian triad. Peak onset is 2–10 years of age.Multifocal multisystem LCH, also called Letterer-Siwe disease, is an often rapidly progressing disease in which Langerhans Cell cells proliferate in
histiocytosis (PLCH) is a unique form of LCH in that it occurs almost exclusively in cigarette smokers. It is now considered a form of smoking-related interstitial lung disease. PLCH develops when an abundance of monoclonal CD1a-positive Langerhans (immature histiocytes) proliferate the bronchioles and
. PLCH develops when an abundance of monoclonal CD1a-positive Langerhans (immature histiocytes) proliferate the bronchioles and alveolar interstitium, and this flood of histiocytes recruits granulocytes like eosinophils and neutrophils and agranulocytes like lymphocytes further destroying bronchioles and the interstitial alveolar space that can cause damage to the lungs
the special state of Langerhans cells that induce cytotoxic T-cell responses, and this is further supported by research that has shown an abundance of T-cells in early PLCH lesions that are CD4+ and present early activation markers. Some affected people recover completely after they stop smoking
extensive eruptions on the scalp.Bone marrow: Pancytopenia with superadded infection usually implies a poor prognosis. Anemia can be due to a number of factors and does not necessarily imply bone marrow infiltration.Lymph node: Enlargement of the liver in 20%, spleen in 30% and
imply bone marrow infiltration.Lymph node: Enlargement of the liver in 20%, spleen in 30% and lymph nodes in 50% of Histiocytosis cases.Endocrine glands: Hypothalamic pituitary axis  commonly involved. Diabetes insipidus is most common. Anterior pituitary hormone deficiency is usually permanent
usually permanent.Lungs: some patients are asymptomatic, diagnosed incidentally because of lung nodules on radiographs; others suffer from chronic cough and shortness of breath.Less frequently gastrointestinal tract, central nervous system, and oral cavity.The pathogenesis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a
.Less frequently gastrointestinal tract, central nervous system, and oral cavity.The pathogenesis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a matter of debate. There are ongoing investigations to determine whether LCH is a reactive (non-cancerous) or neoplastic (cancerous) process. Arguments
tissue, favorable prognosis and relatively good survival rate in patients without organ dysfunction or risk organ involvement.On the other hand, the infiltration of organs by monoclonal population of pathologic cells, and the successful treatment of subset of disseminated disease using chemotherapeutic regimens are all consistent with a neoplastic
dysfunction or risk organ involvement.On the other hand, the infiltration of organs by monoclonal population of pathologic cells, and the successful treatment of subset of disseminated disease using chemotherapeutic regimens are all consistent with a neoplastic process. In addition, a demonstration, using X chromosome–linked
DNA probes, of LCH as a monoclonal proliferation provided additional support for the neoplastic origin of this disease. While clonality is an important attribute of cancer, its presence does not prove that a proliferative process is neoplastic.  Recurrent cytogenetic or genomic abnormalities would also be required to demonstrate
this activating mutation could support the notion to characterize LCH as myeloproliferative disorder.Diagnosis is confirmed histologically by tissue biopsy. Hematoxylin-eosin stain of biopsy slide will show features of Langerhans Cell e.g. distinct cell margin, pink granular cytoplasm. Presence of Birbeck granules on electron microscopy and immuno
and High-resolution CT may show small, cavitated nodules with thin-walled cysts. MRI scan of the brain can show three groups of lesions such as tumourous/granulomatous lesions, nontumourous/granulomatous lesions, and atrophy. Tumourous lesions are usually found in the hypothalamic-pituitary
–restricted protein that induces the formation of Birbeck granules and is constitutively associated with them, is a highly specific marker.Guidelines for management of patients up to 18 years with Langerhans cell histiocytosis have been suggested. Treatment is guided by extent of disease. Solitary bone lesion may be
highly specific marker.Guidelines for management of patients up to 18 years with Langerhans cell histiocytosis have been suggested. Treatment is guided by extent of disease. Solitary bone lesion may be amenable through excision or limited radiation, dosage of 5-10 Gy for children, 24-30
remission and mortality is up to 10%.LCH usually affects children between 1 and 15 years old, with a peak incidence between 5 and 10 years of age.  Among children under the age of 10, yearly incidence is thought to be 1 in 200,000; and in adults even rarer
is slightly more than in females.LCH is usually a sporadic and non-hereditary condition but familial clustering has been noted in limited number of cases. Hashimoto-Pritzker disease is a congenital self-healing variant of Hand-Schüller-Christian disease.In the 10th episode of
of cases. Hashimoto-Pritzker disease is a congenital self-healing variant of Hand-Schüller-Christian disease.In the 10th episode of season 3 of House entitled "Merry Little Christmas", the primary patient is a girl with dwarfism who has a variety of symptoms,
10th episode of season 3 of House entitled "Merry Little Christmas", the primary patient is a girl with dwarfism who has a variety of symptoms, who is ultimately diagnosed with Langerhans cell histiocytosis.Also in the 5th episode, season 1 of "The Good Doctor",
lesions, and itchy skin.While the cause remains unclear, most cases are not hereditary. Most cases are in people over 20 years of age, and it is more common in men than women. Treatment options include sunlight exposure, ultraviolet light, topical corticosteroids, chemotherapy,
more common in men than women. Treatment options include sunlight exposure, ultraviolet light, topical corticosteroids, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy.The symptoms of mycosis fungoides are categorized into three clinical stages: the patch stage, the plaque stage, and the tumour stage. The patch stage is
sizes that may have a wrinkled appearance. They can also look yellowish in people with darker skin. The plaque stage follows the patch stage of mycosis fungoides. It is characterized by the presence of raised lesions that appear reddish-brown; in darker skin tones, plaques may have
skin in any region of the body, including the face and head regions.Itching (pruritus) is common, perhaps in 20 percent of patients, but is not universal. The symptoms displayed are progressive, with early stages consisting of lesions presented as scaly patches. Lesions often
initially develop on the trunk of the body in places that are rarely exposed to the sun, such as the buttocks. The advanced stage of mycosis fungoides is characterized by generalized erythroderma (red rash covering most of the body) with severe pruritus (itching) and scaling. The
rash covering most of the body) with severe pruritus (itching) and scaling. The key difference between Sézary syndrome and the other stages of mycosis fungoides is the large number of cancer cells found in the blood (leukemic disease). When mycosis fungoides develops to meet the criteria
with severe pruritus (itching) and scaling. The key difference between Sézary syndrome and the other stages of mycosis fungoides is the large number of cancer cells found in the blood (leukemic disease). When mycosis fungoides develops to meet the criteria for Sézary syndrome, it is referred
Sézary syndrome, it is referred to as leukemic mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome preceded by mycosis fungoides, or secondary mycosis fungoides.The cause of mycosis fungoides is still unknown. However, there are a few current hypothesized causes of the disease. One of these hypotheses is that mycosis
of these hypotheses is that mycosis fungoides is caused by genetic and cellular signalling abnormalities. Examples of these abnormalities include clonal abnormalities and altered expression of adhesion molecules and/or cytokins.Additionally, the disease is an unusual expression of CD4 T cells, a part of the immune system. These
abnormalities. Examples of these abnormalities include clonal abnormalities and altered expression of adhesion molecules and/or cytokins.Additionally, the disease is an unusual expression of CD4 T cells, a part of the immune system. These T cells are skin-associated, meaning they are biochemically and biologically most
manner.  Mycosis fungoides is the most common type of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), but there are many other types of CTCL that have nothing to do with mycosis fungoides and these disorders are treated differently.Diagnosis is sometimes difficult because the early phases of the
Group and revised by the International Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas/European Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer. This staging system examines the extent of skin involvement (T), presence of lymph node (N), visceral disease (M), and presence of Sezary cells in
Cutaneous Lymphomas/European Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer. This staging system examines the extent of skin involvement (T), presence of lymph node (N), visceral disease (M), and presence of Sezary cells in the peripheral blood (B).Most patients with Mycosis
a favorable prognosis. Patients with advanced stage (Stage IIB-IVB) are often refractory to treatment and have an unfavorable prognosis. Treatment of patients with advanced stage disease is designed to reduce tumor burden, delay disease progression, and preserve quality of life.A 1999 US-
have an unfavorable prognosis. Treatment of patients with advanced stage disease is designed to reduce tumor burden, delay disease progression, and preserve quality of life.A 1999 US-based study of patient records observed a 5-year relative survival rate of 77%, and a 10
advanced stage disease is designed to reduce tumor burden, delay disease progression, and preserve quality of life.A 1999 US-based study of patient records observed a 5-year relative survival rate of 77%, and a 10-year relative survival rate of 69%.
. Superior survival was observed for married women compared with other gender and marital-status groups.Mycosis fungoides can be treated in a variety of ways. Common treatments include simple sunlight, ultraviolet light (mainly NB-UVB 312 nm), topical steroids, topical and systemic chemotherapies
age of 50, where the incidence of the disease (the risk per person in the population) does increase.  The average age of onset is between 45 and 55 years of age for patients with patch and plaque disease only, but is over 60 for patients who present
the disease (the risk per person in the population) does increase.  The average age of onset is between 45 and 55 years of age for patients with patch and plaque disease only, but is over 60 for patients who present with tumours, erythroderma (red skin)
over 60 for patients who present with tumours, erythroderma (red skin) or a leukemic form (the Sézary syndrome). The incidence of mycosis fungoides was seen to be increasing till the year 2000 in the United States, thought to be due to improvements in diagnostics. However
Bernengo MG, Sterry W, Laroche L, Trautinger F, Whittaker S (September 2007). "Revisions to the staging and classification of mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome: a proposal of the International Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas (ISCL) and the cutaneous lymphoma task force of the

(HHV8) is found in the lesions of all those who are affected. Risk factors include poor immune function, either as a result of disease or specific medications, and chronic lymphedema.Four sub-types are described: classic, endemic, immunosuppression therapy-related, and
Epidemic KS occurs in people with AIDS and many parts of the body can be affected. The diagnosis is by tissue biopsy while the extent of disease may be determined by medical imaging.Treatment is based on the sub-type, whether the condition is localized or widespread, and
, whether the condition is localized or widespread, and the person's immune function. Localized skin lesions may be treated by surgery, injections of chemotherapy into the lesion, or radiation therapy. Widespread disease may be treated with chemotherapy or biologic therapy. In those with HIV/AIDS
therapy. In those with HIV/AIDS highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) prevents and often treats KS. In certain cases the addition of chemotherapy may be required. With widespread disease, death may occur.The condition is relatively common in people with HIV/AIDS and following
death may occur.The condition is relatively common in people with HIV/AIDS and following organ transplant as of 2017. Over 35% of people with AIDS may be affected. It was first described by Moritz Kaposi in 1872. It became more widely known as one of the
Skin lesions may be quite disfiguring for the sufferer, and a cause of much psychosocial pathology.The mouth is involved in about 30% of cases, and is the initial site in 15% of AIDS-related KS. In the mouth, the hard palate is most frequently
or speaking.Involvement can be common in those with transplant-related or AIDS-related KS, and it may occur in the absence of skin involvement. The gastrointestinal lesions may be silent or cause weight loss, pain, nausea/vomiting, diarrhea, bleeding (either vomiting
(either vomiting blood or passing it with bowel movements), malabsorption, or intestinal obstruction.Involvement of the airway can present with shortness of breath, fever, cough, coughing up blood or chest pain, or as an incidental finding on chest x-ray. The diagnosis
.In Europe and North America, KSHV is transmitted through saliva. Thus, kissing is a theoretical risk factor for transmission. Higher rates of transmission among gay and bisexual men have been attributed to "deep kissing" sexual partners with KSHV. Another alternative theory suggests that use of
of transmission among gay and bisexual men have been attributed to "deep kissing" sexual partners with KSHV. Another alternative theory suggests that use of saliva as a sexual lubricant might be a major mode for transmission. Prudent advice is to use commercial lubricants when needed and avoid deep kissing
KS lesions contain tumor cells with a characteristic abnormal elongated shape, called spindle cells. The most typical feature of Kaposi sarcoma is the presence of spindle cells forming slits containing red blood cells. Mitotic activity is only  moderate and pleomorphism is usually absent. The tumor is highly vascular
blood vessel origin. The consistent immunoreactivity for podoplanin supports the lymphatic nature of the lesion.				Although KS may be suspected from the appearance of lesions and the patient's risk factors, definite diagnosis can be made only by biopsy and microscopic examination. Detection of the KSHV protein LANA
The consistent immunoreactivity for podoplanin supports the lymphatic nature of the lesion.				Although KS may be suspected from the appearance of lesions and the patient's risk factors, definite diagnosis can be made only by biopsy and microscopic examination. Detection of the KSHV protein LANA in tumor cells confirms the
consistent immunoreactivity for podoplanin supports the lymphatic nature of the lesion.				Although KS may be suspected from the appearance of lesions and the patient's risk factors, definite diagnosis can be made only by biopsy and microscopic examination. Detection of the KSHV protein LANA in tumor cells confirms the
chronic, affecting elderly men from the Mediterranean region, Arabian countries or of Eastern European descent. Countries bordering the Mediterranean basin have higher rates of KSHV/HHV-8 infection than the remainder of Europe.Endemic KS, which has two types. Although this may be present worldwide, it
infection and is a more aggressive disease that infiltrates the skin extensively.African lymphadenopathic Kaposi sarcoma is aggressive, occurring in children under 10 years of age, presenting with lymph node involvement, with or without skin lesions.African cutaneous Kaposi sarcoma presents with nodular, infiltrative, vascular masses
20 and 50, and is endemic in tropical Africa.Immunosuppression-associated Kaposi sarcoma had been described, but only rarely until the advent of calcineurin inhibitors (such as ciclosporines, which are inhibitors of T-cell function) for transplant patients in the 1980s, when its incidence
Immunosuppression-associated Kaposi sarcoma had been described, but only rarely until the advent of calcineurin inhibitors (such as ciclosporines, which are inhibitors of T-cell function) for transplant patients in the 1980s, when its incidence grew rapidly.  The tumor arises either when an HHV
been exposed to the virus or when the transplant recipient already harbors pre-existing HHV 8 infection. Unlike classic Kaposi sarcoma, the site of presentation is more variable.AIDS-associated Kaposi sarcoma typically presents with cutaneous lesions that begin as one or several red to purple-red
Kaposi sarcoma, the Kaposi lesions will shrink upon first starting highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Therefore, HAART is considered the cornerstone of therapy in AIDS-associated Kaposi sarcoma. However, in a certain percentage of such people, Kaposi sarcoma may recur after a number of
of therapy in AIDS-associated Kaposi sarcoma. However, in a certain percentage of such people, Kaposi sarcoma may recur after a number of years on HAART, especially if HIV is not completely suppressed.People with a few local lesions can often be treated with local measures such
used.With the decrease in the death rate among people with HIV/AIDS receiving new treatments in the 1990s, the rates and severity of epidemic KS also decreased. However, the number of people living with HIV/AIDS is increasing in the United States, and it is
people with HIV/AIDS receiving new treatments in the 1990s, the rates and severity of epidemic KS also decreased. However, the number of people living with HIV/AIDS is increasing in the United States, and it is possible that the number of people with AIDS-associated
. However, the number of people living with HIV/AIDS is increasing in the United States, and it is possible that the number of people with AIDS-associated Kaposi sarcoma will again rise as these people live longer with HIV infection.Because of their highly visible nature,
time KS lesions appear, it is likely that the immune system has already been severely weakened.It has been reported that only 6% of men who have sex with men are aware that KS is caused by a virus different from HIV. Thus, there is little community effort
caused by a virus different from HIV. Thus, there is little community effort to prevent KSHV infection.  Likewise, no systematic screening of organ donations is in place.In people with AIDS, Kaposi sarcoma is considered an opportunistic infection, a disease that is able to gain
the United States, an arbitrarily adopted standard of the ages used are 0–14 years inclusive, that is, up to 14 years 11.9 months of age. However, the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with
standard of the ages used are 0–14 years inclusive, that is, up to 14 years 11.9 months of age. However, the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in
years 11.9 months of age. However, the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in children.Worldwide, it is estimated that childhood cancer has an incidence of more than
the definition of childhood cancer sometimes includes adolescents between 15–19 years old. Pediatric oncology is the branch of medicine concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in children.Worldwide, it is estimated that childhood cancer has an incidence of more than 175,000 per year, and a mortality rate
year, and a mortality rate of approximately 96,000 per year.  In developed countries, childhood cancer has a mortality of approximately 20% of cases. In low resource settings, on the other hand, mortality is approximately 80%, or even 90% in the world's
%, or even 90% in the world's poorest countries.  In many developed countries the incidence is slowly increasing, as rates of childhood cancer increased by 0.6% per year between 1975 and 2002 in the United States and by 1.1% per year between 1978 and 1997
the United States and by 1.1% per year between 1978 and 1997 in Europe. Unlike cancers in adults, which typically arise from years of DNA damage, childhood cancers are caused by a misappropriation of normal developmental processes.Children with cancer are at risk for developing various cognitive or
may be related to brain injury stemming from the cancer itself, such as a brain tumor or central nervous system metastasis or from side effects of cancer treatments such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy.  Studies have shown that chemo and radiation therapies may damage brain white matter and disrupt brain
special educational services at school if their cognitive learning disability affects their educational success.Familial and genetic factors are identified in 5-15% of childhood cancer cases. In <5-10% of cases, there are known environmental exposures and exogenous factors, such as prenatal exposure
their educational success.Familial and genetic factors are identified in 5-15% of childhood cancer cases. In <5-10% of cases, there are known environmental exposures and exogenous factors, such as prenatal exposure to tobacco, X-rays, or certain medications.
and exogenous factors, such as prenatal exposure to tobacco, X-rays, or certain medications. For the remaining 75-90% of cases, however, the individual causes remain unknown. In most cases, as in carcinogenesis in general, the cancers are assumed to involve
cases, as in carcinogenesis in general, the cancers are assumed to involve multiple risk factors and variables.Aspects that make the risk factors of childhood cancer different from those seen in adult cancers include:Different, and sometimes unique, exposures to environmental hazards. Children must often rely
Children must often rely on adults to protect them from toxic environmental agents.Immature physiological systems to clear or metabolize environmental substancesThe growth and development of children in phases known as "developmental windows" result in certain "critical windows of vulnerability".Also, a longer life expectancy in children
systems to clear or metabolize environmental substancesThe growth and development of children in phases known as "developmental windows" result in certain "critical windows of vulnerability".Also, a longer life expectancy in children avails for a longer time to manifest cancer processes with long latency periods, increasing the
with long latency periods, increasing the risk of developing some cancer types later in life.Advanced parental age has been associated with increased risk of childhood cancer in the offspring. There are preventable causes of childhood malignancy, such as delivery overuse and misuse of ionizing radiation through computed tomography
cancer types later in life.Advanced parental age has been associated with increased risk of childhood cancer in the offspring. There are preventable causes of childhood malignancy, such as delivery overuse and misuse of ionizing radiation through computed tomography scans when the test is not indicated or when adult protocols
brain tumors (18%), and lymphomas (11%). In 2005, 4.1 of every 100,000 young people under 20 years of age in the U.S. were diagnosed with leukemia, and 0.8 per 100,000 died from it. The number of new cases was highest among the
leukemia, and 0.8 per 100,000 died from it. The number of new cases was highest among the 1–4 age group, but the number of deaths was highest among the 10–14 age group.In 2005, 2.9 of every 100,000 people 0–19 years of age were found to have cancer
age group, but the number of deaths was highest among the 10–14 age group.In 2005, 2.9 of every 100,000 people 0–19 years of age were found to have cancer of the brain or central nervous system, and 0.7 per 100,000 died from it. These cancers were found
or central nervous system, and 0.7 per 100,000 died from it. These cancers were found most often in children between 1 and 4 years of age, but the most deaths occurred among those aged 5–9. The main subtypes of brain and central nervous system tumors in children are:
found most often in children between 1 and 4 years of age, but the most deaths occurred among those aged 5–9. The main subtypes of brain and central nervous system tumors in children are: astrocytoma, brain stem glioma, craniopharyngioma, desmoplastic infantile ganglioglioma, ependymoma, high-
%, many sites)Pleuropulmonary blastoma (lung or pleural cavity)Hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer)Adolescent and young adult oncology (AYA) is a branch of medicine that deals with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer in AYA patients aged 13–30. Studies have continuously shown that while pediatric
carcinoma (liver cancer)Adolescent and young adult oncology (AYA) is a branch of medicine that deals with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer in AYA patients aged 13–30. Studies have continuously shown that while pediatric cancer survival rates have gone up, the survival rate for adolescents
serve patients up to age 21. Additionally, AYAs face problems that adults and children rarely see including college concerns, fertility, and sense of aloneness. Studies have often shown that treating young adults with the same protocols used in pediatrics is more effective than adult oriented treatments.Childhood
Childhood cancers do not typically consist of tumors with clinically targetable oncogenes. Thus, treatment is frequently limited to chemoradiotherapy, which is a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The cytotoxicity of chemotherapy can result in immediate and long-term treatment-related comorbidities. For children undergoing treatment for
tumors with clinically targetable oncogenes. Thus, treatment is frequently limited to chemoradiotherapy, which is a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The cytotoxicity of chemotherapy can result in immediate and long-term treatment-related comorbidities. For children undergoing treatment for high-risk cancer, more than
for high-risk cancer, more than 80% experience life-threatening or fatal toxicity as a result of their treatment.Adult survivors of childhood cancer have some physical, psychological, and social difficulties.Premature heart disease is a major long-term complication in adult survivors of
of childhood cancer have some physical, psychological, and social difficulties.Premature heart disease is a major long-term complication in adult survivors of childhood cancer. Adult survivors are eight times more likely to die of heart disease than other people, and more than half of children treated
adult survivors of childhood cancer. Adult survivors are eight times more likely to die of heart disease than other people, and more than half of children treated for cancer develop some type of cardiac abnormality, although this may be asymptomatic or too mild to qualify for a clinical diagnosis of
of children treated for cancer develop some type of cardiac abnormality, although this may be asymptomatic or too mild to qualify for a clinical diagnosis of heart disease.Childhood cancer survivors are also at risk of developing adverse effects on the kidneys  and the liver. The risk of liver
diagnosis of heart disease.Childhood cancer survivors are also at risk of developing adverse effects on the kidneys  and the liver. The risk of liver late adverse effects in childhood cancer survivors is increased in those who have had radiotherapy to the liver and in people with factors such as
that sickens 6 to 7 children out of every 100,000 annually in parts of sub-Saharan Africa, where it is associated with a history of infection by both Epstein-Barr virus and malaria. In industrialized countries, Burkitt lymphoma is not associated with these infectious conditions.In the
In industrialized countries, Burkitt lymphoma is not associated with these infectious conditions.In the United States, cancer is the second most common cause of death among children between the ages of 1 and 14 years, exceeded only by accidents. More than 16 out of every 100,000 children and
, it was estimated that there was an incidence of 12,000 new cases, and 1,300 deaths, from cancer among children 0 to 14 years of age. Statistics from the 2014 American Cancer Society report:Ages birth to 14Ages 15 to 19Note: Incidence and mortality rates are per 1,000,000
Foundation focuses on finding less toxic and more effective treatments for pediatric cancers. This foundation works with 24 different hospitals across the US in search of treatments effective in practice. Childhood Cancer International is the largest global pediatric cancer foundation. It focuses on early access to care for childhood cancers
2010. Ways in which the foundations are helped by people include writing checks, collecting spare coins, bake/lemonade sales, donating portions of purchases from stores or restaurants, or Paid Time Off donations as well as auctions, bike rides, dance-a-thons. Additionally
to multiply out of control and form a mass. These cancerous cells have the ability to invade other parts of the body. A number of types of pancreatic cancer are known.The most common, pancreatic adenocarcinoma, accounts for about 90% of cases, and the term "
of the body. A number of types of pancreatic cancer are known.The most common, pancreatic adenocarcinoma, accounts for about 90% of cases, and the term "pancreatic cancer" is sometimes used to refer only to that type. These adenocarcinomas start within the part of
sometimes used to refer only to that type. These adenocarcinomas start within the part of the pancreas that makes digestive enzymes. Several other types of cancer, which collectively represent the majority of the non-adenocarcinomas, can also arise from these cells. About 1–2% of cases of
other types of cancer, which collectively represent the majority of the non-adenocarcinomas, can also arise from these cells. About 1–2% of cases of pancreatic cancer are neuroendocrine tumors, which arise from the hormone-producing cells of the pancreas. These are generally less aggressive than
pancreatic cancer may include yellow skin, abdominal or back pain, unexplained weight loss, light-colored stools, dark urine, and loss of appetite. Usually, no symptoms are seen in the disease's early stages, and symptoms that are specific enough to suggest pancreatic cancer typically
and symptoms that are specific enough to suggest pancreatic cancer typically do not develop until the disease has reached an advanced stage. By the time of diagnosis, pancreatic cancer has often spread to other parts of the body.Pancreatic cancer rarely occurs before the age of 40, and more
pancreatic cancer has often spread to other parts of the body.Pancreatic cancer rarely occurs before the age of 40, and more than half of cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma occur in those over 70. Risk factors for pancreatic cancer include tobacco smoking, obesity, diabetes, and certain rare
those over 70. Risk factors for pancreatic cancer include tobacco smoking, obesity, diabetes, and certain rare genetic conditions. About 25% of cases are linked to smoking, and 5–10% are linked to inherited genes. Pancreatic cancer is usually diagnosed by a combination of medical imaging
genes. Pancreatic cancer is usually diagnosed by a combination of medical imaging techniques such as ultrasound or computed tomography, blood tests, and examination of tissue samples (biopsy). The disease is divided into stages, from early (stage I) to late (stage IV).
partly based on the cancer stage. Surgery is the only treatment that can cure pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and may also be done to improve quality of life without the potential for cure. Pain management and medications to improve digestion are sometimes needed. Early palliative care is recommended even for those
a cure.In 2015, pancreatic cancers of all types resulted in 411,600 deaths globally. Pancreatic cancer is the fifth most-common cause of death from cancer in the United Kingdom, and the third most-common in the United States. The disease occurs most often in the
where about 70% of the new cases in 2012 originated. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma typically has a very poor prognosis; after diagnosis, 25% of people survive one year and 5% live for five years. For cancers diagnosed early, the five-year survival rate rises to about
have better outcomes; at five years from diagnosis, 65% of those diagnosed are living, though survival varies considerably depending on the type of tumor.The many types of pancreatic cancer can be divided into two general groups. The vast majority of cases (about 95%)
varies considerably depending on the type of tumor.The many types of pancreatic cancer can be divided into two general groups. The vast majority of cases (about 95%) occur in the part of the pancreas that produces digestive enzymes, known as the exocrine component. Several subtypes
exocrine component. Several subtypes of exocrine pancreatic cancers are described, but their diagnosis and treatment have much in common.  The small minority of cancers that arise in the hormone-producing (endocrine) tissue of the pancreas have different clinical characteristics and are called pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors,
.  This cancer originates in the ducts that carry secretions (such as enzymes and bicarbonate) away from the pancreas. About 60–70% of adenocarcinomas occur in the head of the pancreas.The next-most common type, acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas, arises in the
occur in the head of the pancreas.The next-most common type, acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas, arises in the clusters of cells that produce these enzymes, and represents 5% of exocrine pancreas cancers. Like the 'functioning' endocrine cancers described below, acinar
low-grade neoplasm that mainly affects younger women, and generally has a very good prognosis.Pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms are a broad group of pancreas tumors that have varying malignant potential. They are being detected at a greatly increased rate as CT scans become more powerful and common,
more powerful and common, and discussion continues as how best to assess and treat them, given that many are benign.The small minority of tumors that arise elsewhere in the pancreas are mainly pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs). Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are a diverse group of
new cases of pancreatic cancer are diagnosed following a visit to a hospital emergency department for pain or jaundice. In up to two-thirds of people, abdominal pain is the main symptom, for 46% of the total accompanied by jaundice, with 13% having jaundice without pain
cancer in the head of the pancreas obstructs the common bile duct as it runs through the pancreas.Unexplained weight loss, either from loss of appetite, or loss of exocrine function resulting in poor digestion.The tumor may compress neighboring organs, disrupting digestive processes and making it difficult
tumor may compress neighboring organs, disrupting digestive processes and making it difficult for the stomach to empty, which may cause nausea and a feeling of fullness. The undigested fat leads to foul-smelling, fatty feces that are difficult to flush away. Constipation is also common.At
undigested fat leads to foul-smelling, fatty feces that are difficult to flush away. Constipation is also common.At least 50% of people with pancreatic adenocarcinoma have diabetes at the time of diagnosis. While long-standing diabetes is a known risk factor for pancreatic cancer (
that are difficult to flush away. Constipation is also common.At least 50% of people with pancreatic adenocarcinoma have diabetes at the time of diagnosis. While long-standing diabetes is a known risk factor for pancreatic cancer (see Risk factors), the cancer can itself cause
is a known risk factor for pancreatic cancer (see Risk factors), the cancer can itself cause diabetes, in which case recent onset of diabetes could be considered an early sign of the disease. People over 50 who develop diabetes have eight times the usual risk of developing pancreatic
the extremities, or the superficial veins anywhere on the body, may be associated with pancreatic cancer, and is found in about 10% of cases.Clinical depression has been reported in association with pancreatic cancer in some 10–20% of cases, and can be a hindrance to optimal
cancer, and is found in about 10% of cases.Clinical depression has been reported in association with pancreatic cancer in some 10–20% of cases, and can be a hindrance to optimal management.  The depression sometimes appears before the diagnosis of cancer, suggesting that it may
pancreatic cancer in some 10–20% of cases, and can be a hindrance to optimal management.  The depression sometimes appears before the diagnosis of cancer, suggesting that it may be brought on by the biology of the disease.Other common manifestations of the disease include weakness and tiring
may also be secondary cancers that have spread from other parts of the body.  This is uncommon, found in only about 2% of cases of pancreatic cancer. Kidney cancer is by far the most common cancer to spread to the pancreas, followed by colorectal cancer, and
the best-established avoidable risk factor for pancreatic cancer, approximately doubling risk among long-term smokers, the risk increasing with the number of cigarettes smoked and the years of smoking. The risk declines slowly after smoking cessation, taking some 20 years to return to almost that of
factor for pancreatic cancer, approximately doubling risk among long-term smokers, the risk increasing with the number of cigarettes smoked and the years of smoking. The risk declines slowly after smoking cessation, taking some 20 years to return to almost that of nonsmokers.Obesity - a body
with type 2 diabetes for longer than 10 years may have a 50% increased risk, as compared with individuals without diabetes.Specific types of food (as distinct from obesity) have not been clearly shown to increase the risk of pancreatic cancer. Dietary factors for which  some
has failed to firmly establish alcohol consumption as a direct risk factor for pancreatic cancer. Overall, the association is consistently weak and the majority of studies have found no association, with smoking a strong confounding factor. The evidence is stronger for a link with heavy drinking, of at
precancerous lesion are recognized.The first is pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia. These lesions are microscopic abnormalities in the pancreas and are often found in autopsies of people with no diagnosed cancer. These lesions may progress from low to high grade and then to a tumor. More than 90% of
of people with no diagnosed cancer. These lesions may progress from low to high grade and then to a tumor. More than 90% of cases at all grades carry a faulty KRAS gene, while in grades 2 and 3, damage to three further genes – CDKN2A (p16
age 70. These lesions have about a 25% risk of developing into invasive cancer. They may have KRAS gene mutations (40–65% of cases) and in the GNAS Gs alpha subunit and RNF43, affecting the Wnt signaling pathway. Even if removed surgically,  a considerably
If these lesions become large, cause symptoms, or have suspicious features, they can usually be successfully removed by surgery.A fourth type of cancer that arises in the pancreas is the intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasm. This type was recognised by the WHO in 2010 and constitutes about 1–3%
radiological grounds.The genetic events found in ductal adenocarcinoma have been well characterized, and complete exome sequencing has been done for the common types of tumor. Four genes have each been found to be mutated in the majority of adenocarcinomas: KRAS (in 95% of cases),
and complete exome sequencing has been done for the common types of tumor. Four genes have each been found to be mutated in the majority of adenocarcinomas: KRAS (in 95% of cases), CDKN2A (also in 95%), TP53 (75%), and
the common types of tumor. Four genes have each been found to be mutated in the majority of adenocarcinomas: KRAS (in 95% of cases), CDKN2A (also in 95%), TP53 (75%), and SMAD4 (55%).  The
, hereditary MEN1 gene mutations give rise to MEN1 syndrome, in which primary tumors occur in two or more endocrine glands. About 40–70% of people born with a MEN1 mutation eventually develop a PanNet. Other genes that are frequently mutated include DAXX, mTOR, and ATRX.The symptoms of
on most diagrams) into the thick head, the neck, and the tapering body, ending in the tail.Regardless of a tumor's location, the most common symptom is unexplained weight loss, which may be considerable. A large minority (between 35% and 47%
large minority (between 35% and 47%) of people diagnosed with the disease will have had nausea, vomiting, or a feeling of weakness.  Tumors in the head of the pancreas typically also cause jaundice, pain, loss of appetite, dark urine, and light
nausea, vomiting, or a feeling of weakness.  Tumors in the head of the pancreas typically also cause jaundice, pain, loss of appetite, dark urine, and light-colored stools. Tumors in the body and tail typically also cause pain.People sometimes have recent
, a history of recent but unexplained blood vessel inflammation caused by blood clots (thrombophlebitis) known as Trousseau sign, or a previous attack of pancreatitis. A doctor may suspect pancreatic cancer when the onset of diabetes in someone over 50 years old is accompanied by typical symptoms such as
blood clots (thrombophlebitis) known as Trousseau sign, or a previous attack of pancreatitis. A doctor may suspect pancreatic cancer when the onset of diabetes in someone over 50 years old is accompanied by typical symptoms such as unexplained weight loss, persistent abdominal or back pain, indigestion,
. Abdominal ultrasound is less sensitive and will miss small tumors, but can identify cancers that have spread to the liver and build-up of fluid in the peritoneal cavity (ascites).  It may be used for a quick and cheap first examination before other techniques.A
but a histologic diagnosis is not usually required for removal of the tumor by surgery to go ahead.Liver function tests can show a combination of results indicative of bile duct obstruction (raised conjugated bilirubin, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase levels). CA19-9 (carbohydrate
) is a tumor marker that is frequently elevated in pancreatic cancer. However, it lacks sensitivity and specificity, not least because 5% of people lack the Lewis (a) antigen and cannot produce CA19-9. It has a sensitivity of 80% and specificity of
differentiated glandular structures on microscopic examination. There is typically considerable desmoplasia or formation of a dense fibrous stroma or structural tissue consisting of a range of cell types (including myofibroblasts, macrophages, lymphocytes and mast cells) and deposited material (such as type I collagen and hyaluronic acid)
UICC). The AJCC-UICC staging system designates four main overall stages, ranging from early to advanced disease, based on TNM classification of Tumor size, spread to lymph Nodes, and Metastasis.To help decide treatment, the tumors are also divided into three broader categories based
(TNM classification)										Locally advanced adenocarcinomas have spread into neighboring organs, which may be any of the following (in roughly decreasing order of frequency): the duodenum, stomach, transverse colon, spleen, adrenal gland, or kidney. Very often they also spread to the important
, peritoneal cavity and lungs, all  of which occur in 50% or more of fully advanced cases. PanNETs The 2010 WHO classification of tumors of the digestive system grades all the pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) into three categories, based on their degree of cellular differentiation (
proposed by the European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society.Apart from not smoking, the American Cancer Society recommends keeping a healthy weight, and increasing consumption of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, while decreasing consumption of red and processed meat, although there is no consistent evidence this will prevent
decreasing consumption of red and processed meat, although there is no consistent evidence this will prevent or reduce pancreatic cancer specifically. A 2014 review of research concluded that there was evidence that consumption of citrus fruits and curcumin reduced risk of pancreatic cancer, while there was possibly a beneficial effect
there is no consistent evidence this will prevent or reduce pancreatic cancer specifically. A 2014 review of research concluded that there was evidence that consumption of citrus fruits and curcumin reduced risk of pancreatic cancer, while there was possibly a beneficial effect from whole grains, folate, selenium, and
surgery is possible. Specialists advise that the management of pancreatic cancer should be in the hands of a multidisciplinary team including specialists in several aspects of oncology, and is, therefore, best conducted in larger centers. Surgery Surgery with the intention of a cure is only possible in around
for a major operation.One particular feature that is evaluated is the encouraging presence, or discouraging absence, of a clear layer or plane of fat creating a barrier between the tumor and the vessels.  Traditionally, an assessment is made of the tumor's proximity to major venous
a clear layer or plane of fat creating a barrier between the tumor and the vessels.  Traditionally, an assessment is made of the tumor's proximity to major venous or arterial vessels, in terms of "abutment" (defined as the tumor touching no more than half a blood
clear layer or plane of fat creating a barrier between the tumor and the vessels.  Traditionally, an assessment is made of the tumor's proximity to major venous or arterial vessels, in terms of "abutment" (defined as the tumor touching no more than half a blood
to major venous or arterial vessels, in terms of "abutment" (defined as the tumor touching no more than half a blood vessel's circumference without any fat to separate it), "encasement" (when the tumor encloses most of the vessel's circumference), or
than half a blood vessel's circumference without any fat to separate it), "encasement" (when the tumor encloses most of the vessel's circumference), or full vessel involvement. A resection that includes encased sections of blood vessels may be possible in some cases, particularly if
half a blood vessel's circumference without any fat to separate it), "encasement" (when the tumor encloses most of the vessel's circumference), or full vessel involvement. A resection that includes encased sections of blood vessels may be possible in some cases, particularly if
encasement" (when the tumor encloses most of the vessel's circumference), or full vessel involvement. A resection that includes encased sections of blood vessels may be possible in some cases, particularly if preliminary neoadjuvant therapy is feasible, using chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy.Even when the operation
duodenectomy"), making a bypass for food from the stomach to the jejunum ("gastro-jejunostomy") and attaching a loop of jejunum to the cystic duct to drain bile ("cholecysto-jejunostomy"). It can be performed only if the person is likely
major surgery and if the cancer is localized without invading local structures or metastasizing. It can, therefore, be performed only in a minority of cases.  Cancers of the tail of the pancreas can be resected using a procedure known as a distal pancreatectomy, which often also entails
done using minimally invasive surgery.Although curative surgery no longer entails the very high death rates that occurred until the 1980s, a high proportion of people (about 30–45%) still have to be treated for a post-operative sickness that is not caused by the cancer itself.
) still have to be treated for a post-operative sickness that is not caused by the cancer itself.  The most common complication of surgery is difficulty in emptying the stomach.  Certain more limited surgical procedures may also be used to ease symptoms (see Palliative care):
, if the cancer is invading or compressing the duodenum or colon. In such cases, bypass surgery might overcome the obstruction and improve quality of life but is not intended as a cure. Chemotherapy After surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine or 5-FU can be offered if the
.Gemcitabine was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1997, after a clinical trial reported improvements in quality of life and a 5-week improvement in median survival duration in people with advanced pancreatic cancer. This was the first chemotherapy drug approved by
the FDA primarily for a nonsurvival clinical trial endpoint.  Chemotherapy using gemcitabine alone was the standard for about a decade, as a number of trials testing it in combination with other drugs failed to demonstrate significantly better outcomes. However, the combination of gemcitabine with erlotinib was found to
a decade, as a number of trials testing it in combination with other drugs failed to demonstrate significantly better outcomes. However, the combination of gemcitabine with erlotinib was found to increase survival modestly, and erlotinib was licensed by the FDA for use in pancreatic cancer in 2005.The FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy
few years have only increased survival times by a few months.  Clinical trials are often conducted for novel adjuvant therapies. Radiotherapy The role of radiotherapy as an auxiliary (adjuvant) treatment after potentially curative surgery has been controversial since the 1980s. The European Society for Medical Oncology recommends
for clinicians in the US to be more ready to use adjuvant radiotherapy than those in Europe.  Many clinical trials have tested a variety of treatment combinations since the 1980s, but have failed to settle the matter conclusively.Radiotherapy may form part of treatment to attempt to shrink a
clinical trials have tested a variety of treatment combinations since the 1980s, but have failed to settle the matter conclusively.Radiotherapy may form part of treatment to attempt to shrink a tumor to a resectable state, but its use on unresectable tumors remains controversial as there are conflicting results from
reduced enthusiasm" for its use on locally advanced tumors.Treatment of PanNETs, including the less common malignant types, may include a number of approaches.  Some small tumors of less than 1 cm. that are identified incidentally, for example on a CT scan performed for other
incidentally, for example on a CT scan performed for other purposes, may be followed by watchful waiting. This depends on the assessed risk of surgery which is influenced by the site of the tumor and the presence of other medical problems. Tumors within the pancreas only (localized tumors
only (localized tumors), or with limited metastases, for example to the liver, may be removed by surgery.  The type of surgery depends on the tumor location, and the degree of spread to lymph nodes.For localized tumors, the surgical procedure may be much
for example to the liver, may be removed by surgery.  The type of surgery depends on the tumor location, and the degree of spread to lymph nodes.For localized tumors, the surgical procedure may be much less extensive than the types of surgery used to treat pancreatic
location, and the degree of spread to lymph nodes.For localized tumors, the surgical procedure may be much less extensive than the types of surgery used to treat pancreatic adenocarcinoma described above, but otherwise surgical procedures are similar to those for exocrine tumors.  The range of possible
have a poor outlook.  As all this group are rare, guidelines emphasize that treatment should be undertaken in a specialized center. Use of liver transplantation may be considered in certain cases of liver metastasis.For functioning tumors, the somatostatin analog class of medications, such as octreotide
group are rare, guidelines emphasize that treatment should be undertaken in a specialized center. Use of liver transplantation may be considered in certain cases of liver metastasis.For functioning tumors, the somatostatin analog class of medications, such as octreotide, can reduce the excessive production of hormones.
a specialized center. Use of liver transplantation may be considered in certain cases of liver metastasis.For functioning tumors, the somatostatin analog class of medications, such as octreotide, can reduce the excessive production of hormones. Lanreotide can slow tumor growth. If the tumor is not amenable
certain cases of liver metastasis.For functioning tumors, the somatostatin analog class of medications, such as octreotide, can reduce the excessive production of hormones. Lanreotide can slow tumor growth. If the tumor is not amenable to surgical removal and is causing symptoms, targeted therapy with everolimus
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA), cryoablation, and hepatic artery embolization may also be used.Palliative care is medical care which focuses on treatment of symptoms from serious illness, such as cancer, and improving quality of life.  Because pancreatic adenocarcinoma is usually diagnosed after it has progressed
also be used.Palliative care is medical care which focuses on treatment of symptoms from serious illness, such as cancer, and improving quality of life.  Because pancreatic adenocarcinoma is usually diagnosed after it has progressed to an advanced stage, palliative care as a treatment of symptoms is
improving quality of life.  Because pancreatic adenocarcinoma is usually diagnosed after it has progressed to an advanced stage, palliative care as a treatment of symptoms is often the only treatment possible.Palliative care focuses not on treating the underlying cancer, but on treating symptoms such as pain or
with palliative surgery are obstruction by the tumor of the intestines or bile ducts.  For the latter, which occurs in well over half of cases, a small metal tube called a stent may be inserted by endoscope to keep the ducts draining.  Palliative care can also help
in emptying the stomach (delayed gastric emptying) is common and can be a serious problem, involving hospitalization. Treatment may involve a variety of approaches, including draining the stomach by nasogastric aspiration and drugs called proton-pump inhibitors or H2 antagonists, which both reduce production of gastric
%, although the outlook varies considerably according to the type.For locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinomas, which together represent over 80% of cases, numerous trials comparing chemotherapy regimes have shown increased survival times, but not to more than one year. Overall five-year survival
% in cases diagnosed in 1975–1977, and 4% in 1987–1989 diagnoses, to 6% in 2003–2009. In the less than 20% of cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma with a diagnosis of a localized and small cancerous growth (less than 2 cm in Stage T1), about 20
and 40,000 to die of it.  Although it accounts for only 2.5% of new cases, pancreatic cancer is responsible for 6% of cancer deaths each year. It is the seventh highest cause of death from cancer worldwide. Pancreatic cancer is the fifth most common cause of
only 2.5% of new cases, pancreatic cancer is responsible for 6% of cancer deaths each year. It is the seventh highest cause of death from cancer worldwide. Pancreatic cancer is the fifth most common cause of death from cancer in the United Kingdom, and the third most
of cancer deaths each year. It is the seventh highest cause of death from cancer worldwide. Pancreatic cancer is the fifth most common cause of death from cancer in the United Kingdom, and the third most common in the United States.Globally pancreatic cancer is the 11th most common
non-functioning types. Somewhere between 45% and 90% of PanNETs are thought to be of the non-functioning types. Studies of autopsies have uncovered small PanNETs rather frequently, suggesting that the prevalence of tumors that remain inert and asymptomatic may be relatively high. Overall PanNETs
PanNETs are thought to be of the non-functioning types. Studies of autopsies have uncovered small PanNETs rather frequently, suggesting that the prevalence of tumors that remain inert and asymptomatic may be relatively high. Overall PanNETs are thought to account for about 1 to 2% of all pancreatic
18th-century Italian scientist Giovanni Battista Morgagni, the historical father of modern-day anatomic pathology, who claimed to have traced several cases of cancer in the pancreas. Many 18th and 19th-century physicians were skeptical about the existence of the disease, given the similar appearance of
of cancer in the pancreas. Many 18th and 19th-century physicians were skeptical about the existence of the disease, given the similar appearance of pancreatitis. Some case reports were published in the 1820s and 1830s, and a genuine histopathologic diagnosis was eventually recorded by the American clinician Jacob
20th century, cancer of the head of the pancreas had become a well-established diagnosis.Regarding the recognition of PanNETs, the possibility of cancer of the islet cells was initially suggested in 1888. The first case of hyperinsulinism due to a tumor of this type was reported in
established diagnosis.Regarding the recognition of PanNETs, the possibility of cancer of the islet cells was initially suggested in 1888. The first case of hyperinsulinism due to a tumor of this type was reported in 1927. Recognition of a non-insulin-secreting type of PanNET is generally
he only performed a total of 37 operations.The discovery in the late 1930s that vitamin K prevented bleeding with jaundice, and the development of blood transfusion as an everyday process, both improved post-operative survival, but about 25% of people never left hospital alive as late
bleeding with jaundice, and the development of blood transfusion as an everyday process, both improved post-operative survival, but about 25% of people never left hospital alive as late as the 1970s. In the 1970s a group of American surgeons wrote urging that the procedure was too
or in hospital was only 1%. Another series of 2,050 operations at the Massachusetts General Hospital between 1941 and 2011 showed a similar picture of improvement.Early-stage research on pancreatic cancer includes studies of genetics and early detection, treatment at different cancer stages, surgical strategies,
operations at the Massachusetts General Hospital between 1941 and 2011 showed a similar picture of improvement.Early-stage research on pancreatic cancer includes studies of genetics and early detection, treatment at different cancer stages, surgical strategies, and targeted therapies, such as inhibition of growth factors, immune
pancreatic cancer includes studies of genetics and early detection, treatment at different cancer stages, surgical strategies, and targeted therapies, such as inhibition of growth factors, immune therapies, and vaccines.A key question is the timing of events as the disease develops and progresses – particularly the
surgical strategies, and targeted therapies, such as inhibition of growth factors, immune therapies, and vaccines.A key question is the timing of events as the disease develops and progresses – particularly the role of diabetes, and how and when the disease spreads. The knowledge that new
factors, immune therapies, and vaccines.A key question is the timing of events as the disease develops and progresses – particularly the role of diabetes, and how and when the disease spreads. The knowledge that new onset of diabetes can be an early sign of the disease could
as the disease develops and progresses – particularly the role of diabetes, and how and when the disease spreads. The knowledge that new onset of diabetes can be an early sign of the disease could facilitate timely diagnosis and prevention if a workable screening strategy can be developed. The European
is appropriate for people with a family history of the disease.Keyhole surgery (laparoscopy) rather than Whipple's procedure, particularly in terms of recovery time, is being evaluated. Irreversible electroporation is a relatively novel ablation technique with potential for downstaging and prolonging survival in persons with locally
develop new drugs, including those targeting molecular mechanisms for cancer onset, stem cells, and cell proliferation. A further approach involves the use of immunotherapy, such as oncolytic viruses. Galectin-specific mechanisms of the tumor microenvironment are under study.Gastrointestinal cancerPancreatic Cancer Action Network (organization

having a family history of the disease. Exposure to Agent Orange and certain insecticides might also be a risk. CLL results in the buildup of B cell lymphocytes in the bone marrow, lymph nodes, and blood. These cells do not function well and crowd out healthy blood cells
in people from Asia. Five-year survival following diagnosis is approximately 83% in the United States. It represents less than 1% of deaths from cancer.Most people are diagnosed as having CLL based on the result of a routine blood test that shows a high white blood
monitoring for development of the disorder's various complications (see treatment of MBL complications) and for their progression to CLL.Complications include a low level of antibodies in the bloodstream (hypogammaglobulinemia) leading to recurrent infection, warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia in 10–15% of patients, and bone marrow failure
to CLL.Complications include a low level of antibodies in the bloodstream (hypogammaglobulinemia) leading to recurrent infection, warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia in 10–15% of patients, and bone marrow failure. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia may also transform into Richter's syndrome, the development of fast-growing diffuse large
the 13q14.3 region, (seen in 50% of CLL cases), as well as trisomy in chromosome 12 (seen in 20% of cases), other deletions (i.e., in 11q22-23, 17p13, or 16q21 regions), and less commonly, translocations (
and the risk of developing CLL. Blood transfusions have been ruled out as a risk factor.CLL is usually first suspected by a diagnosis of lymphocytosis, an increase in a type of white blood cell, on a complete blood count test. This frequently is an incidental finding on
Most often the lymphocyte count is greater than 5000 cells per microliter (µl) of blood, but can be much higher. The presence of lymphocytosis in an elderly individual should raise strong suspicion for CLL, and a confirmatory diagnostic test, in particular flow cytometry, should be performed
smudge cells are due to cancer cells lacking in vimentin, a cytoskeletal protein).The diagnosis of CLL is based on the demonstration of an abnormal population of B lymphocytes in the blood, bone marrow, or tissues that display an unusual but characteristic pattern of molecules on the cell surface. This
on the demonstration of an abnormal population of B lymphocytes in the blood, bone marrow, or tissues that display an unusual but characteristic pattern of molecules on the cell surface. This atypical molecular pattern includes the coexpression of cell surface markers clusters of differentiation 5 (CD5) and 23
bone marrow, or tissues that display an unusual but characteristic pattern of molecules on the cell surface. This atypical molecular pattern includes the coexpression of cell surface markers clusters of differentiation 5 (CD5) and 23. In addition, all the CLL cells within one individual are clonal,
that display an unusual but characteristic pattern of molecules on the cell surface. This atypical molecular pattern includes the coexpression of cell surface markers clusters of differentiation 5 (CD5) and 23. In addition, all the CLL cells within one individual are clonal, that is, genetically identical
flow cytometry to confirm clonality and marker molecule expression is needed to establish the diagnosis of CLL. Both are easily accomplished on a small amount of blood. A flow cytometer instrument can examine the expression of molecules on individual cells in fluids. This requires the use of specific antibodies to
to establish the diagnosis of CLL. Both are easily accomplished on a small amount of blood. A flow cytometer instrument can examine the expression of molecules on individual cells in fluids. This requires the use of specific antibodies to marker molecules with fluorescent tags recognized by the instrument. In
fluorescent tags recognized by the instrument. In CLL, the lymphocytes are genetically clonal, of the B cell lineage (expressing marker molecules clusters of differentiation 19 and 20), and characteristically express the marker molecules CD5 and CD23. These B cells resemble normal lymphocytes under the microscope,
with or without lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or anemiaBinet classificationClinical stage A: characterized by no anemia or thrombocytopenia and fewer than three areas of lymphoid involvement (Rai stages 0, I, and II)Clinical stage B: characterized by no anemia or thrombocytopenia with three or more areas of
of lymphoid involvement (Rai stages 0, I, and II)Clinical stage B: characterized by no anemia or thrombocytopenia with three or more areas of lymphoid involvement (Rai stages I and II)Clinical stage C: characterized by anemia and/or thrombocytopenia regardless of the number of areas of lymphoid enlargement (
with three or more areas of lymphoid involvement (Rai stages I and II)Clinical stage C: characterized by anemia and/or thrombocytopenia regardless of the number of areas of lymphoid enlargement (Rai stages III and IV) Array-based karyotyping Array-based karyotyping is a cost-effective alternative to
or more areas of lymphoid involvement (Rai stages I and II)Clinical stage C: characterized by anemia and/or thrombocytopenia regardless of the number of areas of lymphoid enlargement (Rai stages III and IV) Array-based karyotyping Array-based karyotyping is a cost-effective alternative to FISH for
normal lymphocytes and have a prominent nucleolus. The distinction is important as the prognosis and therapy differ from CLL.Hairy cell leukemia is also a neoplasm of B lymphocytes, but the neoplastic cells have a distinct morphology under the microscope (hairy cell leukemia cells have delicate, hair-like projections
combination of cellular microscopic morphology, marker molecule expression, and specific tumor-associated gene defects. This is best accomplished by evaluation of the patient's blood, bone marrow, and occasionally lymph node cells by a pathologist with specific training in blood disorders. A flow cytometer is necessary for
of cellular microscopic morphology, marker molecule expression, and specific tumor-associated gene defects. This is best accomplished by evaluation of the patient's blood, bone marrow, and occasionally lymph node cells by a pathologist with specific training in blood disorders. A flow cytometer is necessary for
the exact diagnosis and the progression of the disease, and even with the preference and experience of the health care practitioner. Any of dozens of agents may be used for CLL therapy.While it is generally considered incurable, CLL progresses slowly in most cases. Many people with CLL
early-stage CLL is, in general, not treated since it is believed that early CLL intervention does not improve survival time or quality of life. Instead, the condition is monitored over time to detect any change in the disease pattern.The decision to start CLL treatment is
, the condition is monitored over time to detect any change in the disease pattern.The decision to start CLL treatment is taken when the person's symptoms or blood counts indicate that the disease has progressed to a point where it may affect quality of life.Clinical "staging systems"
the condition is monitored over time to detect any change in the disease pattern.The decision to start CLL treatment is taken when the person's symptoms or blood counts indicate that the disease has progressed to a point where it may affect quality of life.Clinical "staging systems"
CLL treatment is taken when the person's symptoms or blood counts indicate that the disease has progressed to a point where it may affect quality of life.Clinical "staging systems" such as the Rai four-stage system and the Binet classification can help to determine when and how
with specific markers that should be met before it is initiated.Combination chemotherapy regimens are effective in both newly diagnosed and relapsed CLL. Combinations of fludarabine with alkylating agents (cyclophosphamide) produce higher response rates and a longer progression-free survival than single agents:FC (fludarabine with
vincristine, and prednisolone)Although the purine analogue fludarabine was shown to give superior response rates to chlorambucil as primary therapy, no evidence shows early use of fludarabine improves overall survival, and some clinicians prefer to reserve fludarabine for relapsed disease.Chemoimmunotherapy with FCR has shown to improve response rates,
good physical fitness. This has been the first clinical trial demonstrating that the choice of a first-line therapy can improve the overall survival of patients with CLL.Alkylating agents approved for CLL include bendamustine and cyclophosphamide.Targeted therapy attacks cancer cells at a specific target, with the aim of
(OS) of more than 20–25 years, while no mutations in this region is associated with a median OS of 8–10 years; deletion of chromosome 13q is associated with a median OS of 17 years; and trisomy of chromosome 12, as well as deletion of chromosome 11q,
is associated with a median OS of 8–10 years; deletion of chromosome 13q is associated with a median OS of 17 years; and trisomy of chromosome 12, as well as deletion of chromosome 11q, is associated with a median OS of 9–11 years. While prognosis is highly variable
years; deletion of chromosome 13q is associated with a median OS of 17 years; and trisomy of chromosome 12, as well as deletion of chromosome 11q, is associated with a median OS of 9–11 years. While prognosis is highly variable and dependent on various factors including these mutations
including these mutations, the average 5-year relative survival is 86.1%. Telomere length has been suggested to be a valuable prognostic indicator of survival.CLL is primarily a disease of older adults, with a median age of 70 years at the time of diagnosis. Though less
a valuable prognostic indicator of survival.CLL is primarily a disease of older adults, with a median age of 70 years at the time of diagnosis. Though less common, CLL sometimes affects people between 30 and 39 years of age. The incidence of CLL increases very quickly with
with a median age of 70 years at the time of diagnosis. Though less common, CLL sometimes affects people between 30 and 39 years of age. The incidence of CLL increases very quickly with increasing age.In the United States during 2014, about 15,720 new cases are expected
survival, which was typically about 10 years in past decades, but which can extend to a normal life expectancy, the prevalence (number of people living with the disease) is much higher than the incidence (new diagnoses). CLL is the most common type of leukemia in
(number of people living with the disease) is much higher than the incidence (new diagnoses). CLL is the most common type of leukemia in the UK, accounting for 38% of all leukemia cases. Approximately 3,200 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011.In Western populations
disease in 2011.In Western populations, subclinical "disease" can be identified in 3.5% of normal adults, and in up to 8% of individuals over the age of 70. That is, small clones of B cells with the characteristic CLL phenotype can be identified in many healthy
in 3.5% of normal adults, and in up to 8% of individuals over the age of 70. That is, small clones of B cells with the characteristic CLL phenotype can be identified in many healthy elderly persons. The clinical significance of these cells is unknown.In
incidence is seen in Japanese immigrants to the US, and in African and Asian immigrants to Israel.Of all cancers involving the same class of blood cell, 7% of cases are CLL/SLL.Rates of CLL are somewhat elevated in people exposed to certain chemicals.  Under U.S.
to the US, and in African and Asian immigrants to Israel.Of all cancers involving the same class of blood cell, 7% of cases are CLL/SLL.Rates of CLL are somewhat elevated in people exposed to certain chemicals.  Under U.S. Department of Veterans' Affairs regulations
CLL are presumed to have contracted it from exposure to Agent Orange and may be entitled to compensation.Research in 2008 is comparing different forms of bone marrow transplants to determine which patients are the best candidates and which approach is best in different situations.Researchers at the Abramson Cancer Center
is best in different situations.Researchers at the Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine reported preliminary success in the use of gene therapy, through genetically modified T cells, to treat CLL. The findings, which were published in August 2011, were based on
the cells to proliferate in the body and destroy B cells including those causing the leukemia. Two patients went into remission, while the presence of leukemia in the third patient reduced by 70%.One of the patients had been diagnosed with CLL for 13 years, and his treatment was failing before
advanced disease".Research is also investigating therapies targeting B cell receptor signalling. Syk inhibitor fostamatinib is in trials. The trial of a combination of ibrutinib and venetoclax had encouraging results in a small number of people.Monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosisVirtual karyotypeB-cell CLL/lymphomaChronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
receptor signalling. Syk inhibitor fostamatinib is in trials. The trial of a combination of ibrutinib and venetoclax had encouraging results in a small number of people.Monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosisVirtual karyotypeB-cell CLL/lymphomaChronic Lymphocytic Leukemia at American Cancer SocietyGeneral information about CLL from the US National
is a subtype and one of the most aggressive of the diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. PCNSLs represent around 20% of all cases of lymphomas in HIV infections. (Other types are Burkitt's lymphomas and immunoblastic lymphomas). Primary CNS lymphoma is highly associated with Epstein-
those with AIDS and those immunosuppressed), and does not have a predilection for any particular age group. Mean CD4+ count at time of diagnosis is ~50/uL.  In immunocompromised patients, prognosis is usually poor.  In immunocompetent patients (that is, patients who do
of the depth of the tumour. Treatment with irradiation and corticosteroids often only produces a partial response and tumour recurs in more than 90% of patients. Median survival is 10 to 18 months in immunocompetent patients, and less in those with AIDS. The addition of IV methotrexate and
, median survival time may increase beyond 4 years.  However, radiation is not recommended in conjunction with methotrexate because of an increased risk of leukoencephalopathy and dementia in patients older than 60.  In AIDS patients, perhaps the most important factor with respect to treatment is the use
to treatment is the use of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART), which affects the CD4+ lymphocyte population and the level of immunosuppression. The optimal treatment plan for patients with PCNSL has not been determined. Combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy at least doubles survival time, but
PCNSL has not been determined. Combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy at least doubles survival time, but causes dementia and leukoencephalopathy in at least 50% of patients who undergo it. The most studied chemotherapeutic agent in PCNSL is methotrexate (a folate analogue that interferes with DNA repair). Methotrexate
the responses were complete.The initial response to radiotherapy is often excellent, and may result in a complete remission. However, the duration of response with radiotherapy alone remains short, with median survival after treatment with radiotherapy just 18 months. Methotrexate based chemotherapy markedly improves survival, with
few exceptions, animals consume organic material, breathe oxygen, are able to move, can reproduce sexually, and grow from a hollow sphere of cells, the blastula, during embryonic development. Over 1.5 million living animal species have been described—of which around 1 million are insects
webs. The kingdom Animalia includes humans but in colloquial use the term animal often refers only to non-human animals. The scientific study of animals is known as zoology.Most living animal species are in Bilateria, a clade whose members have a bilaterally symmetric body plan. The
species are in Bilateria, a clade whose members have a bilaterally symmetric body plan. The Bilateria include the protostomes—in which many groups of invertebrates are found, such as nematodes, arthropods, and molluscs—and the deuterostomes, containing both the echinoderms as well as the chordates
phyla became clearly established in the fossil record as marine species during the Cambrian explosion, which began around 542 million years ago. 6,331 groups of genes common to all living animals have been identified; these may have arisen from a single common ancestor that lived 650 million years ago.
(now synonymous for Animalia) and the Protozoa, single-celled organisms no longer considered animals. In modern times, the biological classification of animals relies on advanced techniques, such as molecular phylogenetics, which are effective at demonstrating the evolutionary relationships between taxa.Humans make use of
and to sustain biological processes such as locomotion. Animals living close to hydrothermal vents and cold seeps on the dark sea floor consume organic matter of archaea and bacteria produced in these locations through chemosynthesis (by oxidizing inorganic compounds, such as hydrogen sulfide).Animals originally evolved in the sea. Lineages
archaea and bacteria produced in these locations through chemosynthesis (by oxidizing inorganic compounds, such as hydrogen sulfide).Animals originally evolved in the sea. Lineages of arthropods colonised land around the same time as land plants, probably between 510 and 471 million years ago during the Late Cambrian or Early Ordovician
finned fish Tiktaalik started to move on to land in the late Devonian, about 375 million years ago. Animals occupy virtually all of earth's habitats and microhabitats, including salt water, hydrothermal vents, fresh water, hot springs, swamps, forests, pastures, deserts, air
including salt water, hydrothermal vents, fresh water, hot springs, swamps, forests, pastures, deserts, air, and the interiors of animals, plants, fungi and rocks. Animals are however not particularly heat tolerant; very few of them can survive at constant temperatures above
heat tolerant; very few of them can survive at constant temperatures above 50 °C (122 °F). Only very few species of animals (mostly nematodes) inhabit the most extreme cold deserts of continental Antarctica.The blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus) is the largest animal
more than 8.5 µm when fully grown.The following table lists estimated numbers of described extant species for the animal groups with the largest numbers of species, along with their principal habitats (terrestrial, fresh water, and marine), and free-living or parasitic ways of life
numbers of species, along with their principal habitats (terrestrial, fresh water, and marine), and free-living or parasitic ways of life. Species estimates shown here are based on numbers described scientifically; much larger estimates have been calculated based on various means of prediction,
parasitic ways of life. Species estimates shown here are based on numbers described scientifically; much larger estimates have been calculated based on various means of prediction, and these can vary wildly. For instance, around 25,000–27,000 species of nematodes have been described, while published estimates of the total
; much larger estimates have been calculated based on various means of prediction, and these can vary wildly. For instance, around 25,000–27,000 species of nematodes have been described, while published estimates of the total number of nematode species include 10,000–20,000; 500,000; 10 million; and 100 million
, and these can vary wildly. For instance, around 25,000–27,000 species of nematodes have been described, while published estimates of the total number of nematode species include 10,000–20,000; 500,000; 10 million; and 100 million. Using patterns within the taxonomic hierarchy, the total number of animal
number of nematode species include 10,000–20,000; 500,000; 10 million; and 100 million. Using patterns within the taxonomic hierarchy, the total number of animal species—including those not yet described—was calculated to be about 7.77 million in 2011.The first fossils that might represent animals appear in
-celled protist Gromia sphaerica, so the Tonian trace fossils may not indicate early animal evolution. Around the same time, the layered mats of microorganisms called stromatolites decreased in diversity, perhaps due to grazing by newly evolved animals.Animals are monophyletic, meaning they are derived from a
hox genes, important in body plan development.These genes are found in the Placozoa and the higher animals, the Bilateria. 6,331 groups of genes common to all living animals have been identified; these may have arisen from a single common ancestor that lived 650 million years ago in
for essential components of the Wnt and TGF-beta signalling pathways which may have enabled animals to become multicellular by providing a pattern for the body's system of axes (in three dimensions), and another 7 are for transcription factors including homeodomain proteins involved in the control of development.
essential components of the Wnt and TGF-beta signalling pathways which may have enabled animals to become multicellular by providing a pattern for the body's system of axes (in three dimensions), and another 7 are for transcription factors including homeodomain proteins involved in the control of development.
of the Wnt and TGF-beta signalling pathways which may have enabled animals to become multicellular by providing a pattern for the body's system of axes (in three dimensions), and another 7 are for transcription factors including homeodomain proteins involved in the control of development.The phylogenetic
the body's system of axes (in three dimensions), and another 7 are for transcription factors including homeodomain proteins involved in the control of development.The phylogenetic tree (of major lineages only) indicates approximately how many millions of years ago (mya) the lineages split.
transcription factors including homeodomain proteins involved in the control of development.The phylogenetic tree (of major lineages only) indicates approximately how many millions of years ago (mya) the lineages split.Several animal phyla lack bilateral symmetry. Among these, the sponges (Porifera) probably diverged
, and mammals. The deuterostomes also include the Hemichordata (acorn worms). Ecdysozoa The Ecdysozoa are protostomes, named after their shared trait of ecdysis, growth by moulting. They include the largest animal phylum, the Arthropoda, which contains insects, spiders, crabs, and their
the Kinorhyncha, Priapulida, and Loricifera. These groups have a reduced coelom, called a pseudocoelom. Spiralia The Spiralia are a large group of protostomes that develop by spiral cleavage in the early embryo. The Spiralia's phylogeny has been disputed, but it contains a large clade,
the early embryo. The Spiralia's phylogeny has been disputed, but it contains a large clade, the superphylum Lophotrochozoa, and smaller groups of phyla such as the Rouphozoa which includes the gastrotrichs and the flatworms. All of these are grouped as the Platytrochozoa, which has a sister
husbandry and, mainly at sea, by hunting wild species. Marine fish of many species are caught commercially for food. A smaller number of species are farmed commercially.Invertebrates including cephalopods, crustaceans, and bivalve or gastropod molluscs are hunted or farmed for food.Chickens, cattle
to make items such as coats and hats. Dyestuffs including carmine (cochineal), shellac, and kermes have been made from the bodies of insects. Working animals including cattle and horses have been used for work and transport from the first days of agriculture.Animals such as the
have been made from the bodies of insects. Working animals including cattle and horses have been used for work and transport from the first days of agriculture.Animals such as the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster serve a major role in science as experimental models. Animals have been used to create
to create vaccines since their discovery in the 18th century. Some medicines such as the cancer drug Yondelis are based on toxins or other molecules of animal origin.People have used hunting dogs to help chase down and retrieve animals, and birds of prey to catch birds and mammals,
are based on toxins or other molecules of animal origin.People have used hunting dogs to help chase down and retrieve animals, and birds of prey to catch birds and mammals, while tethered cormorants have been used to catch fish. Poison dart frogs have been used to poison the
to catch birds and mammals, while tethered cormorants have been used to catch fish. Poison dart frogs have been used to poison the tips of blowpipe darts.A wide variety of animals are kept as pets, from invertebrates such as tarantulas and octopuses, insects including praying mantises,
tethered cormorants have been used to catch fish. Poison dart frogs have been used to poison the tips of blowpipe darts.A wide variety of animals are kept as pets, from invertebrates such as tarantulas and octopuses, insects including praying mantises, reptiles such as snakes and chameleons,
. However, the most kept pet species are mammals, namely dogs, cats, and rabbits. There is a tension between the role of animals as companions to humans, and their existence as individuals with rights of their own.A wide variety of terrestrial and aquatic animals are
as individuals with rights of their own.A wide variety of terrestrial and aquatic animals are hunted for sport.Animals have been the subjects of art from the earliest times, both historical, as in Ancient Egypt, and prehistoric, as in the cave paintings at Lascaux. Major
including insects and mammals feature in mythology and religion. In both Japan and Europe, a butterfly was seen as the personification of a person's soul, while the scarab beetle was sacred in ancient Egypt. Among the mammals, cattle, deer, horses, lions, bats,
sacred in ancient Egypt. Among the mammals, cattle, deer, horses, lions, bats, bears, and wolves are the subjects of myths and worship. The signs of the Western and Chinese zodiacs are based on animals.Animal attacksAnimal colorationEthologyFaunaList of animal namesLists of organisms by
and wolves are the subjects of myths and worship. The signs of the Western and Chinese zodiacs are based on animals.Animal attacksAnimal colorationEthologyFaunaList of animal namesLists of organisms by populationTree of Life ProjectAnimal Diversity Web – University of Michigan's database of animalsARKive – multimedia database of endangered/protected
the subjects of myths and worship. The signs of the Western and Chinese zodiacs are based on animals.Animal attacksAnimal colorationEthologyFaunaList of animal namesLists of organisms by populationTree of Life ProjectAnimal Diversity Web – University of Michigan's database of animalsARKive – multimedia database of endangered/protected species

people and resulted in 101,100 deaths in 2015. In the United States, it develops in 6.5 per 100,000 people per year and 0.7% of people are affected at some point in their lives. It usually occurs around the age of 60 and is more common in men than women
<10g/dlBone lesions: one or more osteolytic lesion on skeletal radiography, CT, or PET/CTBone pain affects almost 70% of people with multiple myeloma and is the one of the most common symptoms.  Myeloma bone pain usually involves the spine and ribs, and
a pathological bone fracture. Involvement of the vertebrae may lead to spinal cord compression or kyphosis. Myeloma bone disease is due to the overexpression of receptor activator for nuclear factor κ B ligand (RANKL) by bone marrow stroma. RANKL activates osteoclasts, which resorb bone. The resultant
which may show "punched-out" resorptive lesions (including the "raindrop" appearance of the skull on radiography). The breakdown of bone also leads to the release of calcium ions into the blood, leading to hypercalcemia and its associated symptoms.The anemia found in myeloma
" resorptive lesions (including the "raindrop" appearance of the skull on radiography). The breakdown of bone also leads to the release of calcium ions into the blood, leading to hypercalcemia and its associated symptoms.The anemia found in myeloma is usually normocytic and normochromic. It
normal red blood cell production (hematopoiesis) by cytokines.Impaired kidney function may develop, either acutely or chronically, and with any degree of severity.The most common cause of kidney failure in multiple myeloma is due to proteins secreted by the malignant cells.  Myeloma cells produce
) by cytokines.Impaired kidney function may develop, either acutely or chronically, and with any degree of severity.The most common cause of kidney failure in multiple myeloma is due to proteins secreted by the malignant cells.  Myeloma cells produce monoclonal proteins of varying types, most
.  Depending on the size of these proteins, they may be excreted through the kidneys.  Kidneys can be damaged by the effects of proteins or light chains. Increased bone resorption leads to hypercalcemia and causes nephrocalcinosis, thereby contributing to the kidney failure. Amyloidosis is a distant
causes nephrocalcinosis, thereby contributing to the kidney failure. Amyloidosis is a distant third in the causation.  People with amyloidosis have high levels of amyloid protein that can be excreted through the kidneys and cause damage to the kidneys and other organs.Light chains produce myriad effects that can
K. pneumoniae, while common pathogens causing pyelonephritis include E. coli and other Gram-negative organisms.  The greatest risk period for the occurrence of infection is in the initial few months after the start of chemotherapy. The increased risk of infection is due to immune deficiency.  Although
and other Gram-negative organisms.  The greatest risk period for the occurrence of infection is in the initial few months after the start of chemotherapy. The increased risk of infection is due to immune deficiency.  Although the total immunoglobulin level is typically elevated in multiple myeloma,
.  The greatest risk period for the occurrence of infection is in the initial few months after the start of chemotherapy. The increased risk of infection is due to immune deficiency.  Although the total immunoglobulin level is typically elevated in multiple myeloma, the majority of the antibodies are
is typically elevated in multiple myeloma, the majority of the antibodies are ineffective monoclonal antibodies from the clonal plasma cell.  A selected group of people with documented hypogammaglobulinemia may benefit from replacement immunoglobulin therapy to reduce the risk of infection.Some symptoms (e.g., weakness, confusion,
antibodies from the clonal plasma cell.  A selected group of people with documented hypogammaglobulinemia may benefit from replacement immunoglobulin therapy to reduce the risk of infection.Some symptoms (e.g., weakness, confusion, and fatigue) may be due to anemia or hypercalcemia. Headache, visual changes
weakness, confusion, and fatigue) may be due to anemia or hypercalcemia. Headache, visual changes, and retinopathy may be the result of hyperviscosity  of the blood depending on the properties of the paraprotein. Finally, radicular pain, loss of bowel or bladder control (due
and retinopathy may be the result of hyperviscosity  of the blood depending on the properties of the paraprotein. Finally, radicular pain, loss of bowel or bladder control (due to involvement of spinal cord leading to cord compression) or carpal tunnel syndrome, and other neuropathies (due
3% per year for the next 5 years, and then 1% per year.Obesity is related to multiple myeloma with each increase of body mass index by five increasing the risk by 11%.Studies have reported a familial predisposition to myeloma. Hyperphosphorylation of a number of proteins—the
with each increase of body mass index by five increasing the risk by 11%.Studies have reported a familial predisposition to myeloma. Hyperphosphorylation of a number of proteins—the paratarg proteins—a tendency that is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, appears a common mechanism in these families. This
appears a common mechanism in these families. This tendency is more common in African-American with myeloma and may contribute to the higher rates of myeloma in this group.Rarely, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with multiple myeloma, particularly in individuals who have an
termed Epstein-Barr virus-associated plasma cell myeloma. EBV-positive disease is more common in the plasmacytoma rather than multiple myeloma form of plasma cell cancer. Tissues involved in EBV+ disease typically show foci of EBV+ cells with the appearance of rapidly proliferating immature or poorly differentiated plasma
positive disease is more common in the plasmacytoma rather than multiple myeloma form of plasma cell cancer. Tissues involved in EBV+ disease typically show foci of EBV+ cells with the appearance of rapidly proliferating immature or poorly differentiated plasma cells. The cells express products of EBV genes such as EBER1 and
to progress to multiple myeloma compared to people with EBV-negative plasmacytoma(s). This suggest that EBV may have a role in the progression of plasmacytomas to systemic multiple myeloma.B lymphocytes start in the bone marrow and move to the lymph nodes. As they progress, they mature
generally taken to be either an activated memory B cell or the precursor to plasma cells, the plasmablast.The immune system keeps the proliferation of B cells and the secretion of antibodies under tight control. When chromosomes and genes are damaged, often through rearrangement, this control is lost
activated memory B cell or the precursor to plasma cells, the plasmablast.The immune system keeps the proliferation of B cells and the secretion of antibodies under tight control. When chromosomes and genes are damaged, often through rearrangement, this control is lost. Often, a promoter gene
people with multiple myeloma.  This mutation results in dysregulation of the oncogene which is thought to be an important initiating event in the pathogenesis of myeloma.  The result is a proliferation of a plasma cell clone and genomic instability that leads to further mutations and translocations. The chromosome
cell clone and genomic instability that leads to further mutations and translocations. The chromosome 14 abnormality is observed in about 50% of all cases of myeloma. Deletion of (parts of) chromosome 13 is also observed in about 50% of cases.Production of cytokines (especially IL-6
observed in about 50% of all cases of myeloma. Deletion of (parts of) chromosome 13 is also observed in about 50% of cases.Production of cytokines (especially IL-6) by the plasma cells causes much of their localised damage, such as osteoporosis, and creates
% of all cases of myeloma. Deletion of (parts of) chromosome 13 is also observed in about 50% of cases.Production of cytokines (especially IL-6) by the plasma cells causes much of their localised damage, such as osteoporosis, and creates a microenvironment in which
profile of multiple myeloma cells and normal plasma cells, a gradual demethylation from stem cells to plasma cells was observed. The observed methylation pattern of CpG within intronic regions with enhancer-related chromatin marks in multiple myeloma is similar to undifferentiated precursor and stem cells. These results may represent
PRC2).Increased expression of the PRC2 subunit, EZH2 have been described to be a common feature in multiple myeloma, resulting in an accumulation and redistribution of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation which advances with disease severity.Chromosomal abnormalities commonly found in this disease, like trisomy of multiple odd-numbered
multiple odd-numbered chromosomes, t(11;14), and del(13q), are not associated with a worse prognosis. However, about 25% of patients with newly diagnosed disease have abnormalities associated with a worse prognosis, like t(4;14), t(14;16), and del(17p). Other less
like t(4;14), t(14;16), and del(17p). Other less common abnormalities associated with a worse prognosis include t(14;20) and ≥4 copies of 1q. Associated genetic mutations include ATM, BRAF, CCND1, DIS3, FAM46C, KRAS, NRAS and TP53.The genetic and epigenetic changes occur
KRAS, NRAS and TP53.The genetic and epigenetic changes occur progressively. The initial change, often involving one chromosome 14 translocation, establishes a clone of bone marrow plasma cells that causes the asymptomatic disorder MGUS, which is a premalignant disorder characterized by increased numbers of plasma cells in the bone
translocation, establishes a clone of bone marrow plasma cells that causes the asymptomatic disorder MGUS, which is a premalignant disorder characterized by increased numbers of plasma cells in the bone marrow or the circulation of a myeloma protein immunoglobulin. Further genetic or epigenic changes produce a new clone of bone
numbers of plasma cells in the bone marrow or the circulation of a myeloma protein immunoglobulin. Further genetic or epigenic changes produce a new clone of bone marrow plasma cells, usually descendant from the original clone, that causes the more serious, but still asymptomatic premalignant disorder smoldering multiple myeloma
, that causes the more serious, but still asymptomatic premalignant disorder smoldering multiple myeloma. This myeloma is characterized by a rise in the number of bone marrow plasma cells or levels of the circulating myeloma protein above that seen in MGUS.Subsequent genetic and epigenetic changes lead to a new, more
plasma cells or levels of the circulating myeloma protein above that seen in MGUS.Subsequent genetic and epigenetic changes lead to a new, more aggressive clone of plasma cells, which cause further rises in the level of the circulating myeloma protein, further rises in the number of bone marrow plasma cells
, more aggressive clone of plasma cells, which cause further rises in the level of the circulating myeloma protein, further rises in the number of bone marrow plasma cells, or the development of one or more of a specific set of "CRAB" symptoms, which are the basis
diagnosed fortuitously by detecting a myeloma protein on serum protein electrophoresis tests done for other purposes. MGUS is a relatively stable condition afflicting 3% of people aged 50 and 5% of people aged 70; it progresses to multiple myeloma at a rate of 0.5-1% cases per
on serum protein electrophoresis tests done for other purposes. MGUS is a relatively stable condition afflicting 3% of people aged 50 and 5% of people aged 70; it progresses to multiple myeloma at a rate of 0.5-1% cases per year; smoldering multiple myeloma does so
or M protein) band, with or without reduction of the other (normal) immunoglobulins (known as immune paresis). One type of paraprotein is the Bence Jones protein, which is a urinary paraprotein composed of free light chains.  Quantitative measurements of the paraprotein are necessary
to monitor the disease. The paraprotein is an abnormal immunoglobulin produced by the tumor clone.In theory, multiple myeloma can produce all classes of immunoglobulin, but IgG paraproteins are most common, followed by IgA and IgM. IgD and IgE myeloma are very rare. In addition, light
, followed by IgA and IgM. IgD and IgE myeloma are very rare. In addition, light and or heavy chains (the building blocks of antibodies) may be secreted in isolation: κ- or λ-light chains or any of the five types of heavy chains (α-,
down bone, releasing it into the bloodstream), raised serum creatinine level due to reduced kidney function, which is mainly due to casts of paraprotein deposition in the kidney, although the cast may also contain complete immunoglobulins, Tamm-Horsfall protein and albumin.Other useful laboratory tests
Initial research also suggests that measurement of free light chains may also be used, in conjunction with other markers, for assessment of the risk of progression from MGUS to multiple myeloma.This assay, the serum free light chain assay, has recently been recommended by the International Myeloma Working
serum free light chain assay, has recently been recommended by the International Myeloma Working Group for the screening, diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring of plasma cell dyscrasias.						A bone marrow biopsy is usually performed to estimate the percentage of bone marrow occupied by plasma cells. This percentage
the screening, diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring of plasma cell dyscrasias.						A bone marrow biopsy is usually performed to estimate the percentage of bone marrow occupied by plasma cells. This percentage is used in the diagnostic criteria for myeloma. Immunohistochemistry (staining particular cell types using antibodies
Myeloma and Risk-adapted Therapy (mSMART), which divides people into high-risk and standard-risk categories. People with deletion of chromosome 13 or hypodiploidy by conventional cytogenetics, t(4;14), t(14;16), t(14;20) or 17p- by molecular genetic studies, or with a
have high-risk myeloma.The diagnostic examination of a person with suspected multiple myeloma typically includes a skeletal survey. This is a series of X-rays of the skull, axial skeleton, and proximal long bones. Myeloma activity sometimes appears as "lytic lesions" (with
out lesions" (pepper-pot skull). Lesions may also be sclerotic, which is seen as radiodense. Overall, the radiodensity of myeloma is between −30 and 120 Hounsfield units (HU). Magnetic resonance imaging is more sensitive than simple X-rays in the detection
CT scan is performed to measure the size of soft-tissue plasmacytomas. Bone scans are typically not of any additional value in the workup of people with myeloma (no new bone formation; lytic lesions not well visualized on bone scan).																		In 2003, the IMG agreed
myeloma protein) in either serum or urine and it has to be more than 3g/dL (except in cases of true nonsecretory myeloma)Evidence of end-organ damage felt related to the plasma cell disorder (related organ or tissue impairment, CRAB):HyperCalcemia (corrected calcium >2.75 mmol/
or osteoporosis with compression fractures)Note: Recurrent infections alone in a person who has none of the CRAB features is not sufficient to make the diagnosis of myeloma. People who lack CRAB features, but have evidence of amyloidosis, should be considered as amyloidosis and not myeloma. CRAB-like
who has none of the CRAB features is not sufficient to make the diagnosis of myeloma. People who lack CRAB features, but have evidence of amyloidosis, should be considered as amyloidosis and not myeloma. CRAB-like abnormalities are common with numerous diseases, and these abnormalities must be
and these abnormalities must be felt to be directly attributable to the related plasma cell disorder and every attempt made to rule out other underlying causes of anemia, kidney failure, etc.In 2014, the IMWG updated their criteria further to include biomarkers of malignancy.  These biomarkers are
to rule out other underlying causes of anemia, kidney failure, etc.In 2014, the IMWG updated their criteria further to include biomarkers of malignancy.  These biomarkers are >60% clonal plasma cells, a serum involved / uninvolved free light chain ratio ≥ 100 (the
marrow biopsy andNo myeloma-related organ or tissue impairment or a related B-cell lymphoproliferative disorderRelated conditions include solitary plasmacytoma (a single tumor of plasma cells, typically treated with irradiation), plasma cell dyscrasia (where only the antibodies produce symptoms, e.g., AL amyloidosis),
usually deferred or restricted to clinical trials. Treatment for multiple myeloma is focused on decreasing the clonal plasma cell population and consequently decrease the symptoms of disease. Initial Initial treatment of multiple myeloma depends on the person's age and other illnesses present.The preferred treatment for those under the
is focused on decreasing the clonal plasma cell population and consequently decrease the symptoms of disease. Initial Initial treatment of multiple myeloma depends on the person's age and other illnesses present.The preferred treatment for those under the age of 65 is high-dose chemotherapy, commonly with bortezomib-
focused on decreasing the clonal plasma cell population and consequently decrease the symptoms of disease. Initial Initial treatment of multiple myeloma depends on the person's age and other illnesses present.The preferred treatment for those under the age of 65 is high-dose chemotherapy, commonly with bortezomib-
by a stem cell transplant. A 2016 study concluded that stem cell transplant is the preferred treatment of multiple myeloma. There are two types of stem cell transplants to treat multiple myeloma. In autologous hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation (ASCT) – the patient's own stem cells are
the patient's own stem cells are collected from the patient's own blood. The patient is given high-dose chemotherapy, and the patient's stem cells are then transplanted back into the patient. The process is not curative, but does prolong overall survival and complete remission. In
patient's own stem cells are collected from the patient's own blood. The patient is given high-dose chemotherapy, and the patient's stem cells are then transplanted back into the patient. The process is not curative, but does prolong overall survival and complete remission. In
. The process is not curative, but does prolong overall survival and complete remission. In allogeneic stem-cell transplantation, a healthy donor's stem cells are transplanted into the affected person. Allogenic stem-cell transplantation has the potential for a cure, but is used in a
transplanted into the affected person. Allogenic stem-cell transplantation has the potential for a cure, but is used in a very small percentage of people (and in the relapsed setting, not as part of initial treatment). Furthermore, a 5–10% treatment-associated mortality rate
People over age 65 and people with significant concurrent illnesses often cannot tolerate stem-cell transplantation.  For these people, the standard of care has been chemotherapy with melphalan and prednisone.  Recent studies among this population suggest improved outcomes with new chemotherapy regimens, e.g., with
. Head-to-head studies comparing these regimens have not been performed as of 2008.There is support for continuous therapies with multiple drug combinations of antimyeloma drugs bortezomib, lenalidomide and thalidomide as initial treatment for transplant-ineligible multiple myeloma. Further clinical studies are required to determine the potential
treatment for transplant-ineligible multiple myeloma. Further clinical studies are required to determine the potential harms of these drugs and the effect on the person's quality of life. A 2009 review noted, "Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are the major side effects ofthalidomide and lenalidomide. Lenalidomide
for transplant-ineligible multiple myeloma. Further clinical studies are required to determine the potential harms of these drugs and the effect on the person's quality of life. A 2009 review noted, "Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are the major side effects ofthalidomide and lenalidomide. Lenalidomide
-ineligible multiple myeloma. Further clinical studies are required to determine the potential harms of these drugs and the effect on the person's quality of life. A 2009 review noted, "Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are the major side effects ofthalidomide and lenalidomide. Lenalidomide causes more
ofthalidomide and lenalidomide. Lenalidomide causes more myelosuppression, and thalidomide causes more sedation. Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy and thrombocytopenia are major side effects of bortezomib."Treatment of related hyperviscosity syndrome may be required to prevent neurologic symptoms or kidney failure. Maintenance Most people, including those treated with
2012 clinical trial showed that people with intermediate- and high-risk disease benefit from a bortezomib-based maintenance regimen. Relapse The natural history of myeloma is of relapse following treatment. This may be attributed to tumor heterogeneity.  Depending on the person's condition, the prior treatment
regimen. Relapse The natural history of myeloma is of relapse following treatment. This may be attributed to tumor heterogeneity.  Depending on the person's condition, the prior treatment modalities used and the duration of remission, options for relapsed disease include retreatment with the original agent, use of
. Relapse The natural history of myeloma is of relapse following treatment. This may be attributed to tumor heterogeneity.  Depending on the person's condition, the prior treatment modalities used and the duration of remission, options for relapsed disease include retreatment with the original agent, use of
treatment. This may be attributed to tumor heterogeneity.  Depending on the person's condition, the prior treatment modalities used and the duration of remission, options for relapsed disease include retreatment with the original agent, use of other agents (such as melphalan, cyclophosphamide, thalidomide,
Acute kidney failure typically resolves when the calcium and paraprotein levels are brought under control. Treatment of chronic kidney failure is dependent on the type of kidney failure and may involve dialysis.Several newer options are approved for the management of advanced disease:belantamab mafodotin — a monoclonal antibody against
:belantamab mafodotin — a monoclonal antibody against B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA), also known as CD269, indicated for the treatment of adults with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma who have received at least four prior therapies including an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody, a proteasome inhibitor
, and an immunomodulatory agent.carfilzomib — a proteasome inhibitor that is indicated:as a single agent in people who have received one or more lines of therapyin combination with dexamethasone or with lenalidomide and dexamethasone in people who have received one to three lines of therapydaratumumab — a monoclonal antibody against CD38
who have received one or more lines of therapyin combination with dexamethasone or with lenalidomide and dexamethasone in people who have received one to three lines of therapydaratumumab — a monoclonal antibody against CD38 indicated in people who have received at least three prior lines of therapy including a proteasome inhibitor and an
who have received one to three lines of therapydaratumumab — a monoclonal antibody against CD38 indicated in people who have received at least three prior lines of therapy including a proteasome inhibitor and an immunomodulatory agent or who are double refractory to a proteasome inhibitor and an immunomodulatory agentelotuzumab — an immunostimulatory humanized
in people who have received one to three prior therapiesisatuximab - a monoclonal antibody against CD38 indicated in combination with pomalidomide and dexamethasone for the treatment of adults with multiple myeloma who have received at least two prior therapies including lenalidomide and a proteasome inhibitor.ixazomib — an orally available proteasome inhibitor indicated in
direct antitumor effect even in people without known skeletal disease.  If needed, red blood cell transfusions or erythropoietin can be used for management of anemia.Chemotherapies and stem cell transplants can cause unwanted bleedings and may require platelet transfusions. It was seen that platelet transfusions for people undergoing
bleedings and may require platelet transfusions. It was seen that platelet transfusions for people undergoing a chemotherapy or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the
seen that platelet transfusions for people undergoing a chemotherapy or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet
or a stem cell transplantation for the prevention of bleeding events had different effects on the number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet transfusions depending of the way they were used (
number of participants with a bleeding event, the number of days on which a bleeding occurred, the mortality secondary to bleeding and the number of platelet transfusions depending of the way they were used (therapeutic, depending on a threshold, different dose schedules or prophylactic).Adding physical exercises to the
the standard treatment for adult patients with haematological malignancies like multiple myeloma may result in little to no difference in the mortality, in the quality of life and in the physical functioning. These exercises may result in a slight reduction in depression. Furthermore, aerobic physical exercises probably reduce fatigue
uncertain about the effect and serious adverse events Multiple national cancer treatment guidelines recommend early palliative care for people with advanced multiple myeloma at the time of diagnosis and for anyone who has significant symptoms.Palliative care is appropriate at any stage of multiple myeloma and can be provided alongside curative treatment
symptoms.Palliative care is appropriate at any stage of multiple myeloma and can be provided alongside curative treatment.  In addition to addressing symptoms of cancer, palliative care helps manage unwanted side effects, such as pain and nausea related to treatments.Oral prophylaxis, hygiene instruction and elimination
cancer, palliative care helps manage unwanted side effects, such as pain and nausea related to treatments.Oral prophylaxis, hygiene instruction and elimination of sources of infection within the mouth before beginning cancer treatment, can reduce the risk of infectious complications. Before starting bisphosphonates therapy, the person
palliative care helps manage unwanted side effects, such as pain and nausea related to treatments.Oral prophylaxis, hygiene instruction and elimination of sources of infection within the mouth before beginning cancer treatment, can reduce the risk of infectious complications. Before starting bisphosphonates therapy, the person's dental
of infectious complications. Before starting bisphosphonates therapy, the person's dental health should be evaluated to assess the risk factors to prevent the development of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ). If there are any symptoms or radiographic appearance of MRONJ like jaw pain, loose
pain, loose tooth, mucosal swelling, early referral to an oral surgeon is recommended. Dental extractions should be avoided during the active period of treatment and treat the tooth with nonsurgical root canal treatment instead.Overall the 5-year survival rate is around 54% in the United
estimated 30,330 new cases and 12,650 deaths were reported. These numbers are based on assumptions made using data from 2011, which estimated the number of people affected as 83,367 people, the number of new cases as 6.1 per 100,000 people per year, and the mortality as 3.4 per 100,000
number of new cases of this disease in the United States and Asians the lowest. Results of one study found the number of new cases of myeloma to be 9.5 cases per 100,000 African Americans and 4.1 cases per 100,000 Caucasian Americans. Among African Americans, myeloma is one of the
be 9.5 cases per 100,000 African Americans and 4.1 cases per 100,000 Caucasian Americans. Among African Americans, myeloma is one of the top-10 causes of cancer death.Myeloma is the 17th-most common cancer in the UK: around 4,800 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011.
most common cancer in the UK: around 4,800 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011. It is the 16th-most common cause of cancer death: around 2,700 people died of it in 2012.Multiple myeloma has been diagnosed in dogs, cats, and horses.In dogs,
, and plasma-protein studies. In dogs, protein studies usually reveal the monoclonal gammaglobulin elevation to be IgA or IgG in equal number of cases. In rare cases the globulin elevation is IgM, which is referred to as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. The prognosis for initial control and
cases the globulin elevation is IgM, which is referred to as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. The prognosis for initial control and return to good quality of life in dogs is good;  43% of dogs started on a combination chemotherapeutic protocol achieved complete remission.  Long-term survival
to as Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. The prognosis for initial control and return to good quality of life in dogs is good;  43% of dogs started on a combination chemotherapeutic protocol achieved complete remission.  Long-term survival is normal, with a median of 540 days reported
term survival is normal, with a median of 540 days reported. The disease eventually recurs, becoming resistant to available therapies. The complications of kidney failure, sepsis, or pain can lead to an animal's death, frequently by euthanasia.Multiple myeloma at Curlie
The disease eventually recurs, becoming resistant to available therapies. The complications of kidney failure, sepsis, or pain can lead to an animal's death, frequently by euthanasia.Multiple myeloma at Curlie
on the outside of the neck or oral cavity. Given the location of these cancers, trouble breathing may also be present.The majority of head and neck cancer is caused by the use of alcohol or tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, with increasing cases linked to the human papillomavirus
Given the location of these cancers, trouble breathing may also be present.The majority of head and neck cancer is caused by the use of alcohol or tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, with increasing cases linked to the human papillomavirus (HPV). Other risk factors include Epstein-
activity, but confirmation will likely not be known until around 2060. This is because oropharyngeal cancer typical presents in the 4th - 6th decade of life, and this is a relatively new vaccine. While screening in the general population does not appear to be useful, screening high risk
often is curable if it is diagnosed early; however, outcomes are typically poor if it is diagnosed late. Treatment may include a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Previous diagnosis and treatment of one head and neck cancer confers higher risk of developing
cancer confers higher risk of developing a second head and neck cancer or recurrence.Globally, head and neck cancer accounts for 650,000 new cases of cancer and 330,000 deaths annually on average. In 2018, it was the seventh most common cancer worldwide with 890,000 new cases documented and 450,000
United States, head and neck cancer makes up 3% of all cancer cases (averaging 53,000 new diagnoses per year) and 1.5% of cancer deaths  Notably, head and neck cancer secondary to chronic alcohol or tobacco use has been steadily declining as less of the population chronically
swelling, and visible lumps on the outside of the neck or oral cavity. Head and neck cancer often begins with benign signs and symptoms of disease, like an enlarged lymph node on the outside of the neck, a hoarse-sounding voice or progressive worsening cough or sore throat
enlarged lymph node on the outside of the neck, a hoarse-sounding voice or progressive worsening cough or sore throat. In the case of head and neck cancer, these symptoms will be notably persistent and become chronic. There may be a lump or a sore in the throat
heal, bleeding from the mouth or numbness, bad breath, discolored patches that persist in the mouth, a sore tongue, and slurring of speech if the cancer is affecting the tongue. There may also be congested sinuses, weight loss, and some numbness or paralysis of facial
numbness or paralysis of facial muscles.Squamous cell cancers are common in areas of the mouth, including the inner lip, tongue, floor of mouth, gums, and hard palate. Cancers of the mouth are strongly associated with tobacco use, especially use of chewing tobacco or dipping
, tongue, floor of mouth, gums, and hard palate. Cancers of the mouth are strongly associated with tobacco use, especially use of chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco, as well as heavy alcohol use. Cancers of this region, particularly the tongue, are more frequently treated
cancers.Surgeries for oral cancers include:Maxillectomy (can be done with or without orbital exenteration)Mandibulectomy (removal of the lower jaw or part of it)Glossectomy (tongue removal, can be total, hemi or partial)Radical neck dissectionCombinational e.g., glossectomy and laryngectomy done together.The defect is typically
). Laryngeal cancer is strongly associated with tobacco smoking.Surgery can include laser excision of small vocal cord lesions, partial laryngectomy (removal of part of the larynx) or total laryngectomy (removal of the whole larynx). If the whole larynx has been removed, the person
, adenocarcinomas, adenoid cystic carcinomas, and mucoepidermoid carcinomas. Rarer still are melanomas and lymphomas of the upper aerodigestive tract.Around 75% of cases are caused by alcohol and tobacco use.Tobacco smoking is one of the main risk factors for head and neck cancer. A major
A major carcinogenic compound in tobacco smoke is acrylonitrile. Acrylonitrile appears to indirectly cause DNA damage by increasing oxidative stress, leading to increased levels of 8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG) and formamidopyrimidine in DNA. (see image). Both 8-oxo-dG
a lifetime increased risk for head and neck cancers that is 5- to 25-fold increased over the general population.The ex-smoker's risk for developing a head and neck cancer begins to approach the risk in the general population 15 years after smoking cessation. The high prevalence
risk for developing a head and neck cancer begins to approach the risk in the general population 15 years after smoking cessation. The high prevalence of tobacco and alcohol use worldwide and the high association of these cancers with these substances makes them ideal targets for enhanced cancer prevention.Smokeless tobacco
oral cancer and oropharyngeal cancer. Cigar smoking is also an important risk factor for oral cancer.Other environmental carcinogens suspected of being potential causes of head and neck cancer include occupational exposures such as nickel ore refining, exposure to textile fibers, and woodworking. Use of marijuana, especially
being potential causes of head and neck cancer include occupational exposures such as nickel ore refining, exposure to textile fibers, and woodworking. Use of marijuana, especially when younger, has been linked to an increase in squamous-cell carcinoma cases in at least one study, while other
other studies suggest use is not shown to be associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma, or associated with decreased squamous cell carcinoma.Excessive consumption of eggs, processed meats, and red meat were associated with increased rates of cancer of the head and neck in one study, while consumption
carcinoma, or associated with decreased squamous cell carcinoma.Excessive consumption of eggs, processed meats, and red meat were associated with increased rates of cancer of the head and neck in one study, while consumption of raw and cooked vegetables seemed to be protective.Vitamin E was not
neck in one study, while consumption of raw and cooked vegetables seemed to be protective.Vitamin E was not found to prevent the development of leukoplakia, the white plaques that are the precursor for carcinomas of the mucosal surfaces, in adult smokers.Another study examined a combination of
%), and least often in the oral cavity (12%–18%) and larynx (3%–7%).Some experts estimate that while up to 50% of cancers of the tonsil may be infected with HPV, only 50% of these are likely to be caused by HPV (as opposed to
HPV16 status is associated with improved prognosis over HPV-negative OSCC.HPV can induce tumor by several mechanisms:E6 and E7 oncogenic proteins.Disruption of tumor suppressor genes.High-level DNA amplifications, for example, oncogenes.Generating alternative nonfunctional transcripts .interchromosomal rearrangements.Distinct host genome methylation
nonfunctional transcripts .interchromosomal rearrangements.Distinct host genome methylation and expression patterns, produced even when virus isn't integrated into the host genome.Induction of cancer can be associated for the expression of viral oncoproteins, the most important E6 and E7, or other mechanisms many of them run by
the most important E6 and E7, or other mechanisms many of them run by the integration such as the generation of altered transcripts, disruption of tumor suppressors, high levels of DNA amplifications, interchromosomial rearrangements, or changes in DNA methylation patterns, the latter being able to find even
, or other mechanisms many of them run by the integration such as the generation of altered transcripts, disruption of tumor suppressors, high levels of DNA amplifications, interchromosomial rearrangements, or changes in DNA methylation patterns, the latter being able to find even when the virus is identified in
degradation while pRb inhibits E7. p53 prevents cell growth when DNA is damaged by activating apoptosis and p21, a kinase that blocks the formation of cyclin D / Cdk4 avoiding pRb phosphorylation and thereby prevents release of E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation
kinase that blocks the formation of cyclin D / Cdk4 avoiding pRb phosphorylation and thereby prevents release of E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation. pRb remains bound to E2F while this action phosphorylated preventing activation of proliferation. Therefore, E6 and E7 act
E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation. pRb remains bound to E2F while this action phosphorylated preventing activation of proliferation. Therefore, E6 and E7 act synergistically in triggering cell cycle progression and therefore uncontrolled proliferation by inactivating the p53 and Rb tumor suppressors
in or near oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes and it is for this reason that the integration of the virus can greatly contribute to the development of tumor characteristics. Epstein–Barr virus Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection is associated with nasopharyngeal cancer. Nasopharyngeal cancer occurs endemically in
be measured to screen high-risk populations. Nasopharyngeal cancer has also been associated with consumption of salted fish, which may contain high levels of nitrites.The presence of acid reflux disease (gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD]) or larynx reflux disease can also be a major factor
-risk populations. Nasopharyngeal cancer has also been associated with consumption of salted fish, which may contain high levels of nitrites.The presence of acid reflux disease (gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD]) or larynx reflux disease can also be a major factor. Stomach acids that flow
are more aggressive than others depending upon their location. The stage at which the cancer is diagnosed is also a critical factor in the prognosis of throat cancer. Treatment guidelines recommend routine testing for the presence of HPV for all oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma tumours. Squamous-cell carcinoma Squamous
in both the skin and mucous membranes. It accounts for over 90% of all head and neck cancers, including more than 90% of throat cancer. Squamous cell carcinoma is most likely to appear in males over 40 years of age with a history of heavy alcohol use coupled
and neck cancers, including more than 90% of throat cancer. Squamous cell carcinoma is most likely to appear in males over 40 years of age with a history of heavy alcohol use coupled with smoking.The tumor marker Cyfra 21-1 may be useful in diagnosing squamous cell
(either of intestinal or non-intestinal cell-type).Avoidance of recognised risk factors (as described above) is the single most effective form of prevention. Regular dental examinations may identify pre-cancerous lesions in the oral cavity.When diagnosed early, oral, head and neck cancers
-cancerous lesions in the oral cavity.When diagnosed early, oral, head and neck cancers can be treated more easily and the chances of survival increase tremendously. As of 2017 it was not known if existing HPV vaccines can help prevent head and neck cancer.Improvements in diagnosis
help prevent head and neck cancer.Improvements in diagnosis and local management, as well as targeted therapy, have led to improvements in quality of life and survival for people with head and neck cancer.After a histologic diagnosis has been established and tumor extent determined, the selection of
After a histologic diagnosis has been established and tumor extent determined, the selection of appropriate treatment for a specific cancer depends on a complex array of variables, including tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors,
including tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors, and the person's preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays
tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors, and the person's preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays
preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays of treatment for most head and neck cancers and remain the standard of care in most cases. For small primary cancers without regional metastases (stage
and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays of treatment for most head and neck cancers and remain the standard of care in most cases. For small primary cancers without regional metastases (stage I or II), wide surgical excision alone or curative radiation
there has been an emphasis on the use of various induction or concomitant chemotherapy regimens.Surgery as a treatment is frequently used in most types of head and neck cancer. Usually the goal is to remove the cancerous cells entirely. This can be particularly tricky if the cancer is near
(remove) some or all of the cervical lymph nodes to prevent further spread of the disease.CO2 laser surgery is also another form of treatment. Transoral laser microsurgery allows surgeons to remove tumors from the voice box with no external incisions. It also allows access to tumors that
also allows access to tumors that are not reachable with robotic surgery. During the surgery, surgeon and pathologist work together to assess the adequacy of excision (“margin status”), minimizing the amount of normal tissue removed or damaged. This technique helps give the person as much
damaged. This technique helps give the person as much speech and swallowing function as possible after surgery.Radiation therapy is the most common form of treatment. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and
person as much speech and swallowing function as possible after surgery.Radiation therapy is the most common form of treatment. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in
, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in the treatments of cancers of the head and neck. Most people with head and neck cancer who are treated in the United States and Europe are treated with
therapy using high energy photons. At higher doses, head and neck radiation is associated with thyroid dysfunction and pituitary axis dysfunction. Radiation therapy of head and neck cancers can also cause acute skin reactions of varying levels of severity, which can be treated and managed with topically applied creams
is associated with thyroid dysfunction and pituitary axis dysfunction. Radiation therapy of head and neck cancers can also cause acute skin reactions of varying levels of severity, which can be treated and managed with topically applied creams or specialist films.Chemotherapy in throat cancer is not generally used to cure
establish in other parts of the body. Typical chemotherapy agents are a combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin. Cetuximab is also used in the treatment of throat cancer.Docetaxel-based chemotherapy has shown a very good response in locally advanced head and neck cancer. Docetaxel is the only taxane
, amifostine is often administered intravenously by a chemotherapy clinic prior to IMRT radiotherapy sessions. Amifostine protects the gums and salivary glands from the effects of radiation.There is no evidence that erythropoietin should be routinely given with radiotherapy.Photodynamic therapy may have promise in treating mucosal dysplasia and small
early clinical trials for treatment of advanced head and neck cancer.Targeted therapy, according to the National Cancer Institute, is "a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances, such as monoclonal antibodies, to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells."
pivotal significance, interpretation is difficult since cetuximab-radiotherapy was not directly compared to chemoradiotherapy. The results of ongoing studies to clarify the role of cetuximab in this disease are awaited with interest.Another study evaluated the impact of adding cetuximab to conventional chemotherapy (cisplatin) versus cisplatin alone
cetuximab to conventional chemotherapy (cisplatin) versus cisplatin alone. This study found no improvement in survival or disease-free survival with the addition of cetuximab to the conventional chemotherapy.However, another study which completed in March 2007 found that there was an improvement in survival.A 2010
.However, another study which completed in March 2007 found that there was an improvement in survival.A 2010 review concluded that the combination of cetuximab and platin/5-fluorouracil should be considered the current standard first-line regimen.Gendicine is a gene therapy that employs an adenovirus to
gene therapy that employs an adenovirus to deliver the tumor suppressor gene p53 to cells. It was approved in China in 2003 for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.The mutational profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they
gene p53 to cells. It was approved in China in 2003 for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.The mutational profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment
profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment that activates the immune system to fight cancer. One type of immunotherapy, immune checkpoint blockade, binds to and blocks inhibitory signals on
further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment that activates the immune system to fight cancer. One type of immunotherapy, immune checkpoint blockade, binds to and blocks inhibitory signals on immune cells to release their anti-cancer activities.In 2016,
inhibitory signals on immune cells to release their anti-cancer activities.In 2016, the FDA granted accelerated approval to pembrolizumab for the treatment of people with recurrent or metastatic HNSCC with disease progression on or after platinum-containing chemotherapy. Later that year, the FDA approved nivolumab for
people with head and neck cancer may experience the following symptoms and treatment side effects:Programs to support the emotional and social well-being of people who have been diagnosed with head and neck cancer may be offered. There is no clear evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions or
neck cancer may be offered. There is no clear evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions or any particular type of psychosocial program or length of time that is the most helpful for those with head and neck cancer.Although early-stage head and neck cancers (especially laryngeal and
cancer.Although early-stage head and neck cancers (especially laryngeal and oral cavity) have high cure rates, up to 50% of people with head and neck cancer present with advanced disease.Cure rates decrease in locally advanced cases, whose probability of cure is inversely related
up to 50% of people with head and neck cancer present with advanced disease.Cure rates decrease in locally advanced cases, whose probability of cure is inversely related to tumor size and even more so to the extent of regional node involvement. (citation needed). HPV-
and neck squamous-cell cancers. These staging systems attempt to standardize clinical trial criteria for research studies, and attempt to define prognostic categories of disease. Squamous cell cancers of the head and neck are staged according to the TNM classification system, where T is the size and configuration
are staged according to the TNM classification system, where T is the size and configuration of the tumor, N is the presence or absence of lymph node metastases, and M is the presence or absence of distant metastases. The T, N, and M characteristics are combined to
produce a “stage” of the cancer, from I to IVB.Survival advantages provided by new treatment modalities have been undermined by the significant percentage of people cured of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) who subsequently develop second primary tumors. The incidence of second primary tumors ranges
, called field cancerization.Many people with head and neck cancer are also not able to eat sufficiently. A tumor may impair a person's ability to swallow and eat, and throat cancer may affect the digestive system. The difficulty in swallowing can lead to a person to choke
throat cancer may affect the digestive system. The difficulty in swallowing can lead to a person to choke on their food in the early stages of digestion and interfere with the food's smooth travels down into the esophagus and beyond.The treatments for throat cancer can also be harmful to
vomiting can lead to an electrolyte imbalance which has serious consequences for the proper functioning of the heart. Frequent vomiting can also upset the balance of stomach acids which has a negative impact on the digestive system, especially the lining of the stomach and esophagus.Enteral feeding, a method
on the digestive system, especially the lining of the stomach and esophagus.Enteral feeding, a method that adds nutrients directly into a person's stomach using a nasogastric feeding tube or a gastrostomy tube, may be necessary for some people. Further research is required to determine the most
If the throat cancer is near the bottom of the throat, it has a high likelihood of spreading to the lungs and interfering with the person's ability to breathe; this is even more likely if the person is a smoker, because they are highly susceptible to lung cancer.Cancer
the throat cancer is near the bottom of the throat, it has a high likelihood of spreading to the lungs and interfering with the person's ability to breathe; this is even more likely if the person is a smoker, because they are highly susceptible to lung cancer.Cancer
decreased ability or inability to eat, speak or effectively communicate. Physical appearance is often altered by both the cancer itself or as a consequence of treatment side effects. Psychological distress may occur and feelings such as uncertainty and fear may arise. Some people may also have a changed physical
Experience Increased Caregiver Distress Unique to care for Head and Neck Cancer PatientsMultiple studies have shown caregivers for head and neck cancer patients show higher rates of distress and poorer mental health compared to both the general population as well as those caring for non-head-and-neck cancer patients
will encounter during the treatment and recovery phase for this unique patient population, which span both technical and emotional support. Of note, caregivers of patient's who report lower quality of life, demonstrate increased burden and fatigue that extents beyond the treatment phase.Examples of technically difficult caregiver
phase for this unique patient population, which span both technical and emotional support. Of note, caregivers of patient's who report lower quality of life, demonstrate increased burden and fatigue that extents beyond the treatment phase.Examples of technically difficult caregiver duties include: tube feeding, oral
throat cancer can throw the nervous system into chaos, making it unable to properly regulate and control the body.The number of new cases of head and neck cancers in the United States was 40,490 in 2006, accounting for about 3% of adult malignancies. A total of 11,170
in the Far East. In Southeast China and Taiwan, head and neck cancer, specifically nasopharyngeal cancer, is the most-common cause of death in young men.In 2008, there were 22,900 cases of oral cavity cancer, 12,250 cases of laryngeal cancer, and 12,410 cases
cases of pharyngeal cancer in the United States.In 2002, 7,400 Americans were projected to die of these cancers.More than 70% of throat cancers are at an advanced stage when discovered.Men are 89% more likely than women to be diagnosed with, and are almost
and are almost twice as likely to die of these cancers.African Americans are disproportionately affected by head and neck cancer, with younger ages of incidence, increased mortality, and more advanced disease at presentation. Laryngeal cancer incidence is higher in African Americans relative to white, Asian,

in the U.S.), is the movement of humans, animals and goods from one location to another. In other words, the action of transport is defined as a particular movement of an organism or thing from a point A (a place in space) to a point B.
defined as a particular movement of an organism or thing from a point A (a place in space) to a point B.  Modes of transport include air, land (rail and road), water, cable, pipeline and space. The field can be divided into infrastructure
space. The field can be divided into infrastructure, vehicles and operations. Transport enables trade between people, which is essential for the development of civilizations.Transport infrastructure consists of the fixed installations, including roads, railways, airways, waterways, canals and pipelines and terminals such as
, warehouses, trucking terminals, refueling depots (including fueling docks and fuel stations) and seaports. Terminals may be used both for interchange of passengers and cargo and for maintenance.Vehicles traveling on these networks may include automobiles, bicycles, buses, trains, trucks, helicopters,
operated, and the procedures set for this purpose, including financing, legalities, and policies. In the transport industry, operations and ownership of infrastructure can be either public or private, depending on the country and mode.Passenger transport may be public, where operators provide scheduled services
volumes of durable items. Transport plays an important part in economic growth and globalization, but most types cause air pollution and use large amounts of land. While it is heavily subsidized by governments, good planning of transport is essential to make traffic flow and restrain urban sprawl.The
and globalization, but most types cause air pollution and use large amounts of land. While it is heavily subsidized by governments, good planning of transport is essential to make traffic flow and restrain urban sprawl.The United Nation's first formally recognized the role of transport in sustainable development
governments, good planning of transport is essential to make traffic flow and restrain urban sprawl.The United Nation's first formally recognized the role of transport in sustainable development in the 1992 United Nation's Earth summit. In the 2012 United Nation's World Conference, global leaders unanimously recognised
infrastructure, and cities and human settlements. Meeting sustainable transport targets is said to be particularly important to achieving the Paris Agreement.A mode of transport is a solution that makes use of a particular type of vehicle, infrastructure, and operation. The transport of a person or of
is said to be particularly important to achieving the Paris Agreement.A mode of transport is a solution that makes use of a particular type of vehicle, infrastructure, and operation. The transport of a person or of cargo may involve one mode or several of the modes, with
the latter case being called intermodal or multimodal transport. Each mode has its own advantages and disadvantages, and will be chosen on the basis of cost, capability, and route.Human-powered transport, a form of sustainable transport, is the transport of people and/or goods using
chosen on the basis of cost, capability, and route.Human-powered transport, a form of sustainable transport, is the transport of people and/or goods using human muscle-power, in the form of walking, running and swimming. Modern technology has allowed machines to enhance
-powered transport, a form of sustainable transport, is the transport of people and/or goods using human muscle-power, in the form of walking, running and swimming. Modern technology has allowed machines to enhance human power. Human-powered transport remains popular for reasons of cost
form of walking, running and swimming. Modern technology has allowed machines to enhance human power. Human-powered transport remains popular for reasons of cost-saving, leisure, physical exercise, and environmentalism; it is sometimes the only type available, especially in underdeveloped or inaccessible regions
available, especially in underdeveloped or inaccessible regions.Although humans are able to walk without infrastructure, the transport can be enhanced through the use of roads, especially when using the human power with vehicles, such as bicycles and inline skates. Human-powered vehicles have also been developed
; even the air can be entered with human-powered aircraft.Animal-powered transport is the use of working animals for the movement of people and commodities. Humans may ride some of the animals directly, use them as pack animals for carrying goods, or harness them,
and military cargo aircraft.Two things necessary for aircraft are air flow over the wings for lift and an area for landing. The majority of aircraft also need an airport with the infrastructure to receive maintenance, restocking, refueling and for the loading and unloading of crew, cargo,
landing. The majority of aircraft also need an airport with the infrastructure to receive maintenance, restocking, refueling and for the loading and unloading of crew, cargo, and passengers. While the vast majority of aircraft land and take off on land, some are capable of take-
infrastructure to receive maintenance, restocking, refueling and for the loading and unloading of crew, cargo, and passengers. While the vast majority of aircraft land and take off on land, some are capable of take-off and landing on ice, snow, and calm water.
, some are capable of take-off and landing on ice, snow, and calm water.The aircraft is the second fastest method of transport, after the rocket. Commercial jets can reach up to 955 kilometres per hour (593 mph), single-engine aircraft 555
mph), single-engine aircraft 555 kilometres per hour (345 mph). Aviation is able to quickly transport people and limited amounts of cargo over longer distances, but incurs high costs and energy use; for short distances or in inaccessible places, helicopters can be used.
that up to 500,000 people are on planes at any time."Land transport covers all land-based transport systems that provide for the movement of people, goods and services. Land transport plays a vital role in linking communities to each other. Land transport is a key factor in
apart, or gauge. The rails and perpendicular beams are placed on a foundation made of concrete or compressed earth and gravel in a bed of ballast. Alternative methods include monorail and maglev.A train consists of one or more connected vehicles that operate on the rails. Propulsion is
manual loading and unloading of the cargo. Since the 1960s, container trains have become the dominant solution for general freight, while large quantities of bulk are transported by dedicated trains. Road A road is an identifiable route, way or path between two or more places. Roads are
space easement and route.The most common road vehicle is the automobile; a wheeled passenger vehicle that carries its own motor. Other users of roads include buses, trucks, motorcycles, bicycles and pedestrians. As of 2010, there were 1.015 billion automobiles worldwide.Road transport offers
users to transfer the vehicle from one lane to the other and from one road to another according to the need and convenience. This flexibility of changes in location, direction, speed, and timings of travel is not available to other modes of transport. It is possible to provide
and from one road to another according to the need and convenience. This flexibility of changes in location, direction, speed, and timings of travel is not available to other modes of transport. It is possible to provide door-to-door service only by road transport.
the need and convenience. This flexibility of changes in location, direction, speed, and timings of travel is not available to other modes of transport. It is possible to provide door-to-door service only by road transport.Automobiles provide high flexibility with low capacity,
cities; buses allow for more efficient travel at the cost of reduced flexibility. Road transport by truck is often the initial and final stage of freight transport.Water transport is movement by means of a watercraft—such as a barge, boat, ship or sailboat—over a
transport.Water transport is movement by means of a watercraft—such as a barge, boat, ship or sailboat—over a body of water, such as a sea, ocean, lake, canal or river. The need for buoyancy is common to watercraft, making the
using wood or coal and fed through a steam external combustion engine. Now most ships have an internal combustion engine using a slightly refined type of petroleum called bunker fuel. Some ships, such as submarines, use nuclear power to produce the steam. Recreational or educational craft still use
educational craft still use wind power, while some smaller craft use internal combustion engines to drive one or more propellers, or in the case of jet boats, an inboard water jet. In shallow draft areas, hovercraft are propelled by large pusher-prop fans. (See Marine
fans. (See Marine propulsion.)Although it is slow compared to other transport, modern sea transport is a highly efficient method of transporting large quantities of goods. Commercial vessels, nearly 35,000 in number, carried 7.4 billion tons of cargo in 2007. Transport by water is significantly less costly
sea transport is a highly efficient method of transporting large quantities of goods. Commercial vessels, nearly 35,000 in number, carried 7.4 billion tons of cargo in 2007. Transport by water is significantly less costly than air transport for transcontinental shipping; short sea shipping and ferries remain viable in
also categorized as conveyor transport.Spaceflight is transport out of Earth's atmosphere into outer space by means of a spacecraft. While large amounts of research have gone into technology, it is rarely used except to put satellites into orbit, and conduct scientific experiments. However, man has
. For passenger transport, terminals are integrating different modes to allow riders, who are interchanging between modes, to take advantage of each mode's benefits. For instance, airport rail links connect airports to the city centres and suburbs. The terminals for automobiles are parking lots, while
and coaches can operate from simple stops. For freight, terminals act as transshipment points, though some cargo is transported directly from the point of production to the point of use.The financing of infrastructure can either be public or private. Transport is often a natural monopoly and a
simple stops. For freight, terminals act as transshipment points, though some cargo is transported directly from the point of production to the point of use.The financing of infrastructure can either be public or private. Transport is often a natural monopoly and a necessity for the public;
, terminals act as transshipment points, though some cargo is transported directly from the point of production to the point of use.The financing of infrastructure can either be public or private. Transport is often a natural monopoly and a necessity for the public; roads, and in some
such as landing fees at airports, or toll plazas on roads. Independent of this, authorities may impose taxes on the purchase or use of vehicles. Because of poor forecasting and overestimation of passenger numbers by planners, there is frequently a benefits shortfall for transport infrastructure projects.A
plazas on roads. Independent of this, authorities may impose taxes on the purchase or use of vehicles. Because of poor forecasting and overestimation of passenger numbers by planners, there is frequently a benefits shortfall for transport infrastructure projects.A vehicle is a non-living device that is
this is most commonly done through a steam engine, combustion engine, electric motor, a jet engine or a rocket, though other means of propulsion also exist. Vehicles also need a system of converting the energy into movement; this is most commonly done through wheels, propellers and
number is expected to rise to 68%. Public transport policy must evolve to meet the changing priorities of the urban world. The institution of policy enforces order in transport, which is by nature chaotic as people attempt to travel from one place to another as fast as possible.
as people attempt to travel from one place to another as fast as possible. This policy helps to reduce accidents and save lives.Relocation of travelers and cargo are the most common uses of transport. However, other uses exist, such as the strategic and tactical relocation of armed
another as fast as possible. This policy helps to reduce accidents and save lives.Relocation of travelers and cargo are the most common uses of transport. However, other uses exist, such as the strategic and tactical relocation of armed forces during warfare, or the civilian mobility construction
predominantly used for the longest, including intercontinental, travel. Intermodal passenger transport is where a journey is performed through the use of several modes of transport; since all human transport normally starts and ends with walking, all passenger transport can be considered intermodal. Public transport may also involve
all human transport normally starts and ends with walking, all passenger transport can be considered intermodal. Public transport may also involve the intermediate change of vehicle, within or across modes, at a transport hub, such as a bus or railway station.Taxis and buses can be found
a bus or railway station.Taxis and buses can be found on both ends of the public transport spectrum. Buses are the cheapest mode of transport but are not necessarily flexible, and taxis are very flexible but more expensive. In the middle is demand-responsive transport, offering
may be restricted for some individuals due to legislation and visa requirements.An ambulance is a vehicle used to transport people from or between places of treatment, and in some instances will also provide out-of-hospital medical care to the patient. The word is often associated with
of-hospital medical care to the patient. The word is often associated with road-going "emergency ambulances", which form part of emergency medical services, administering emergency care to those with acute medical problems.Air medical services is a comprehensive term covering the use of air
part of emergency medical services, administering emergency care to those with acute medical problems.Air medical services is a comprehensive term covering the use of air transport to move patients to and from healthcare facilities and accident scenes. Personnel provide comprehensive prehospital and emergency and critical care to all types
air transport to move patients to and from healthcare facilities and accident scenes. Personnel provide comprehensive prehospital and emergency and critical care to all types of patients during aeromedical evacuation or rescue operations, aboard helicopters, propeller aircraft, or jet aircraft.Freight transport, or shipping, is a
is being located further away from consumption, rapidly increasing the demand for transport. Transport creates place utility by moving the goods from the place of production to the place of consumption. While all modes of transport are used for cargo transport, there is high differentiation between the nature of
from consumption, rapidly increasing the demand for transport. Transport creates place utility by moving the goods from the place of production to the place of consumption. While all modes of transport are used for cargo transport, there is high differentiation between the nature of the cargo transport, in
demand for transport. Transport creates place utility by moving the goods from the place of production to the place of consumption. While all modes of transport are used for cargo transport, there is high differentiation between the nature of the cargo transport, in which mode is chosen. Logistics
transferring products from producer to consumer, including storage, transport, transshipment, warehousing, material-handling, and packaging, with associated exchange of information. Incoterm deals with the handling of payment and responsibility of risk during transport.Containerization, with the standardization of ISO containers on all
storage, transport, transshipment, warehousing, material-handling, and packaging, with associated exchange of information. Incoterm deals with the handling of payment and responsibility of risk during transport.Containerization, with the standardization of ISO containers on all vehicles and at all ports, has revolutionized
transshipment, warehousing, material-handling, and packaging, with associated exchange of information. Incoterm deals with the handling of payment and responsibility of risk during transport.Containerization, with the standardization of ISO containers on all vehicles and at all ports, has revolutionized international and domestic trade
haul of any ship or car; containerization allows for automated handling and transfer between modes, and the standardized sizes allow for gains in economy of scale in vehicle operation. This has been one of the key driving factors in international trade and globalization since the 1950s.Bulk transport is
handling can allow enormous quantities to be handled quickly and efficiently. The low value of the cargo combined with high volume also means that economies of scale become essential in transport, and gigantic ships and whole trains are commonly used to transport bulk. Liquid products with sufficient volume may also
sufficient volume may also be transported by pipeline.Air freight has become more common for products of high value; while less than one percent of world transport by volume is by airline, it amounts to forty percent of the value. Time has become especially important in regards to principles
to mail, common items sent by air include electronics and fashion clothing.Transport is a key necessity for specialization—allowing production and consumption of products to occur at different locations.  Throughout history, transport has been a spur to expansion; better transport allows more trade and a
occur at different locations.  Throughout history, transport has been a spur to expansion; better transport allows more trade and a greater spread of people. Economic growth has always been dependent on increasing the capacity and rationality of transport. But the infrastructure and operation of transport have a
expansion; better transport allows more trade and a greater spread of people. Economic growth has always been dependent on increasing the capacity and rationality of transport. But the infrastructure and operation of transport have a great impact on the land, and transport is the largest drainer of energy,
a greater spread of people. Economic growth has always been dependent on increasing the capacity and rationality of transport. But the infrastructure and operation of transport have a great impact on the land, and transport is the largest drainer of energy, making transport sustainability a major issue.Due
and rationality of transport. But the infrastructure and operation of transport have a great impact on the land, and transport is the largest drainer of energy, making transport sustainability a major issue.Due to the way modern cities and communities are planned and operated, a physical distinction between
cities and communities are planned and operated, a physical distinction between home and work is usually created, forcing people to transport themselves to places of work, study, or leisure, as well as to temporarily relocate for other daily activities. Passenger transport is also the essence of tourism
places of work, study, or leisure, as well as to temporarily relocate for other daily activities. Passenger transport is also the essence of tourism, a major part of recreational transport. Commerce requires the transport of people to conduct business, either to allow face-to-
relocate for other daily activities. Passenger transport is also the essence of tourism, a major part of recreational transport. Commerce requires the transport of people to conduct business, either to allow face-to-face communication for important decisions or to move specialists from their regular place of
of people to conduct business, either to allow face-to-face communication for important decisions or to move specialists from their regular place of work to sites where they are needed.Transport planning allows for high utilization and less impact regarding new infrastructure. Using models of transport forecasting
regular place of work to sites where they are needed.Transport planning allows for high utilization and less impact regarding new infrastructure. Using models of transport forecasting, planners are able to predict future transport patterns. On the operative level, logistics allows owners of cargo to plan transport as
new infrastructure. Using models of transport forecasting, planners are able to predict future transport patterns. On the operative level, logistics allows owners of cargo to plan transport as part of the supply chain. Transport as a field is also studied through transport economics, a component for the
to plan transport as part of the supply chain. Transport as a field is also studied through transport economics, a component for the creation of regulation policy by authorities. Transport engineering, a sub-discipline of civil engineering, must take into account trip generation, trip distribution,
and route assignment, while the operative level is handled through traffic engineering.Because of the negative impacts incurred, transport often becomes the subject of controversy related to choice of mode, as well as increased capacity. Automotive transport can be seen as a tragedy of the commons, where
the operative level is handled through traffic engineering.Because of the negative impacts incurred, transport often becomes the subject of controversy related to choice of mode, as well as increased capacity. Automotive transport can be seen as a tragedy of the commons, where the flexibility and comfort for
seen as a tragedy of the commons, where the flexibility and comfort for the individual deteriorate the natural and urban environment for all. Density of development depends on mode of transport, with public transport allowing for better spatial utilization. Good land use keeps common activities close to people's
the commons, where the flexibility and comfort for the individual deteriorate the natural and urban environment for all. Density of development depends on mode of transport, with public transport allowing for better spatial utilization. Good land use keeps common activities close to people's homes and places higher-
of development depends on mode of transport, with public transport allowing for better spatial utilization. Good land use keeps common activities close to people's homes and places higher-density development closer to transport lines and hubs, to minimize the need for transport. There are economies of agglomeration
people's homes and places higher-density development closer to transport lines and hubs, to minimize the need for transport. There are economies of agglomeration. Beyond transport, some land uses are more efficient when clustered. Transport facilities consume land, and in cities pavement (devoted to
it. It is only in recent years that traditional practices have started to be questioned in many places; as a result of new types of analysis which bring in a much broader range of skills than those traditionally relied on—spanning such areas as environmental impact analysis, public health
traditional practices have started to be questioned in many places; as a result of new types of analysis which bring in a much broader range of skills than those traditionally relied on—spanning such areas as environmental impact analysis, public health, sociology and economics—the viability of the
analysis, public health, sociology and economics—the viability of the old mobility solutions is increasingly being questioned.Transport is a major use of energy and burns most of the world's petroleum. This creates air pollution, including nitrous oxides and particulates, and is a significant contributor
economics—the viability of the old mobility solutions is increasingly being questioned.Transport is a major use of energy and burns most of the world's petroleum. This creates air pollution, including nitrous oxides and particulates, and is a significant contributor to global warming through emission of carbon dioxide
—the viability of the old mobility solutions is increasingly being questioned.Transport is a major use of energy and burns most of the world's petroleum. This creates air pollution, including nitrous oxides and particulates, and is a significant contributor to global warming through emission of carbon dioxide
the world's petroleum. This creates air pollution, including nitrous oxides and particulates, and is a significant contributor to global warming through emission of carbon dioxide, for which transport is the fastest-growing emission sector. By sub-sector, road transport is the largest contributor to
global warming. Environmental regulations in developed countries have reduced individual vehicles' emissions; however, this has been offset by increases in the numbers of vehicles and in the use of each vehicle. Some pathways to reduce the carbon emissions of road vehicles considerably have been studied. Energy use
this has been offset by increases in the numbers of vehicles and in the use of each vehicle. Some pathways to reduce the carbon emissions of road vehicles considerably have been studied. Energy use and emissions vary largely between modes, causing environmentalists to call for a transition from air and
transition from air and road to rail and human-powered transport, as well as increased transport electrification and energy efficiency. Other environmental impacts of transport systems include traffic congestion and automobile-oriented urban sprawl, which can consume natural habitat and agricultural lands. By reducing transport emissions globally
on sustainable consumption and production (ending fossil fuel subsidies) and SDG 14 on oceans, seas and marine resources.Humans' first means of transport involved walking, running and swimming. The domestication of animals introduced a new way to lay the burden of transport on more powerful creatures
and SDG 14 on oceans, seas and marine resources.Humans' first means of transport involved walking, running and swimming. The domestication of animals introduced a new way to lay the burden of transport on more powerful creatures, allowing the hauling of heavier loads, or humans riding
.Humans' first means of transport involved walking, running and swimming. The domestication of animals introduced a new way to lay the burden of transport on more powerful creatures, allowing the hauling of heavier loads, or humans riding animals for greater speed and duration. Inventions such as
greater speed and duration. Inventions such as the wheel and the sled (U.K. sledge) helped make animal transport more efficient through the introduction of vehicles. Water transport, including rowed and sailed vessels, dates back to time immemorial, and was the only efficient way to transport large
time immemorial, and was the only efficient way to transport large quantities or over large distances prior to the Industrial Revolution.The first forms of road transport involved animals, such as horses (domesticated in the 4th or the 3rd millennium BCE), oxen (from about 8000 BCE)or
water transport was accomplished with ships that were either rowed or used the wind for propulsion, or a combination of the two. The importance of water has led to most cities that grew up as sites for trading being located on rivers or on the sea-shore, often at
cities that grew up as sites for trading being located on rivers or on the sea-shore, often at the intersection of two bodies of water. Until the Industrial Revolution, transport remained slow and costly, and production and consumption gravitated as close to each other as feasible.
and costly, and production and consumption gravitated as close to each other as feasible.The Industrial Revolution in the 19th century saw a number of inventions fundamentally change transport. With telegraphy, communication became instant and independent of the transport of physical objects. The invention of the steam engine
fast way to transport people and express goods over long distances.After World War II (1939–1945) the automobile and airlines took higher shares of transport, reducing rail and water to freight and short-haul passenger services. Scientific spaceflight began in the 1950s, with rapid growth until
passenger services. Scientific spaceflight began in the 1950s, with rapid growth until the 1970s, when interest dwindled. In the 1950s the introduction of containerization gave massive efficiency gains in freight transport, fostering globalization. International air travel became much more accessible in the 1960s with the commercialization of
582-31273-9. Retrieved 22 December 2012.Lay, Maxwell G (1992). Ways of the World: A History of the World's Roads and of the Vehicles that Used Them. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 0-8135-2691-4.Stopford, Martin (1997)
-31273-9. Retrieved 22 December 2012.Lay, Maxwell G (1992). Ways of the World: A History of the World's Roads and of the Vehicles that Used Them. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 0-8135-2691-4.Stopford, Martin (1997)
myelogenous leukemia (CML), also known as chronic myeloid leukemia, is a cancer of the white blood cells. It is a form of leukemia characterized by the increased and unregulated growth of myeloid cells in the bone marrow and the accumulation of these cells in the blood. CML
improved long-term survival rates since 2001. These drugs have revolutionized treatment of this disease and allow most patients to have a good quality of life when compared to the former chemotherapy drugs. In Western countries, CML accounts for 15–25% of all adult leukemias and 14% of
of life when compared to the former chemotherapy drugs. In Western countries, CML accounts for 15–25% of all adult leukemias and 14% of leukemias overall (including the pediatric population, where CML is less common).The way CML presents depends on the stage of the disease at diagnosis as
with symptoms indicative of hepatosplenomegaly and the resulting upper quadrant pain this causes. The enlarged spleen may put pressure on the stomach causing a loss of appetite and resulting weight loss. It may also present with mild fever and night sweats due to an elevated basal level of metabolism.Some
causing a loss of appetite and resulting weight loss. It may also present with mild fever and night sweats due to an elevated basal level of metabolism.Some (<10%) are diagnosed during the accelerated stage which most often presents bleeding, petechiae and ecchymosis. In these
region") gene from chromosome 22 is fused with the ABL gene on chromosome 9. This abnormal "fusion" gene generates a protein of p210 or sometimes p185 weight (p210 is short for 210 kDa protein, a shorthand used for characterizing proteins based solely on size).
-ABL transcript is continuously active and does not require activation by other cellular messaging proteins. In turn, BCR-ABL activates a cascade of proteins that control the cell cycle, speeding up cell division. Moreover, the BCR-ABL protein inhibits DNA repair, causing genomic instability
activity of the BCR-ABL protein have been developed. These tyrosine kinase inhibitors can induce complete remissions in CML, confirming the central importance of bcr-abl as the cause of CML.CML is often suspected on the basis of a complete blood count, which shows increased granulocytes of all
9;22) translocation, or have evidence of the translocation by FISH or RT-PCR in spite of normal routine karyotyping. The small subset of patients without detectable molecular evidence of BCR-ABL1 fusion may be better classified as having an undifferentiated myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorder, as their clinical
a similar appearance on a blood smear.CML is often divided into three phases based on clinical characteristics and laboratory findings. In the absence of intervention, CML typically begins in the chronic phase, and over the course of several years progresses to an accelerated phase and ultimately to a
). Some patients may already be in the accelerated phase or blast crisis by the time they are diagnosed. Chronic phase Approximately 85% of patients with CML are in the chronic phase at the time of diagnosis. During this phase, patients are usually asymptomatic or have only mild
blast crisis by the time they are diagnosed. Chronic phase Approximately 85% of patients with CML are in the chronic phase at the time of diagnosis. During this phase, patients are usually asymptomatic or have only mild symptoms of fatigue, left side pain, joint and/or hip pain
with CML are in the chronic phase at the time of diagnosis. During this phase, patients are usually asymptomatic or have only mild symptoms of fatigue, left side pain, joint and/or hip pain, or abdominal fullness. The duration of chronic phase is variable and depends on how
The duration of chronic phase is variable and depends on how early the disease was diagnosed as well as the therapies used. In the absence of treatment, the disease progresses to an accelerated phase. Precise patient staging based on clinical markers and personal genomic profile will likely prove beneficial in
the disease progresses to an accelerated phase. Precise patient staging based on clinical markers and personal genomic profile will likely prove beneficial in the assessment of disease history with respect to progression risk. Accelerated phase Criteria for diagnosing transition into the accelerated phase are somewhat variable; the most widely used
-TKI criteriaHaematological resistance (or failure to achieve a complete haematological response d) to the first TKIAny haematological, cytogenetic, or molecular indications of resistance to two sequential TKIsOccurrence of two or more mutations in the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene during TKI therapyThe patient is considered to be in
blastsThe only curative treatment for CML is a bone marrow transplant or an allogeneic stem cell transplant. Other than this there are four major mainstays of treatment in CML: treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors, myelosuppressive or leukopheresis therapy (to counteract the leukocytosis during early treatment), splenectomy and
myelosuppressive or leukopheresis therapy (to counteract the leukocytosis during early treatment), splenectomy and interferon alfa-2b treatment. Due to the high median age of patients with CML it is relatively rare for CML to be seen in pregnant women, despite this, however, chronic myelogenous leukemia can be
like imatinib; in these situations it may be the preferred myelosuppressive agent due to its relative lack of leukemogenic effects and hence the relative lack of potential for secondary hematologic malignancies to result from treatment. IRIS, an international study that compared interferon/cytarabine combination and the first of these
that compared interferon/cytarabine combination and the first of these new drugs imatinib, with long-term follow up, demonstrated the clear superiority of tyrosine-kinase-targeted inhibition over existing treatments. Imatinib The first of this new class of drugs was imatinib mesylate (marketed as Gleevec
term follow up, demonstrated the clear superiority of tyrosine-kinase-targeted inhibition over existing treatments. Imatinib The first of this new class of drugs was imatinib mesylate (marketed as Gleevec or Glivec), approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2001.
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2001. Imatinib was found to inhibit the progression of CML in the majority of patients (65–75%) sufficiently to achieve regrowth of their normal bone marrow stem cell population (a cytogenetic response) with stable proportions of
cells (as evaluated by RT-PCR) persist in nearly all patients, the treatment has to be continued indefinitely. Since the advent of imatinib, CML has become the first cancer in which a standard medical treatment may give to the patient a normal life expectancy. Dasatinib,
intolerant of imatinib. Bosutinib received US FDA and EU European Medicines Agency approval on 4 September 2012 and 27 March 2013 respectively for the treatment of adult patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive (Ph+) chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) with resistance, or intolerance to prior therapy. Treatment
CML) with resistance, or intolerance to prior therapy. Treatment-resistant CML While capable of producing significantly improved responses compared with the action of imatinib, neither dasatinib nor nilotinib could overcome drug resistance caused by one particular mutation found to occur in the structure of BCR-ABL1 known
This is a study which is ongoing through 2014. In September 2012, the FDA approved omacetaxine for the treatment of CML in the case of resistance to other chemotherapeutic agents.Independently, ARIAD pharmaceuticals, adapting the chemical structures from first and second-generation TK inhibitors, arrived at
T315I, as well as all other known mutations of the oncoprotein. The drug, ponatinib, gained FDA approval in December 2012 for treatment of patients with resistant or intolerant CML. Just as with second generation TK inhibitors, early approval is being sought to extend the use of ponatinib
treatment of patients with resistant or intolerant CML. Just as with second generation TK inhibitors, early approval is being sought to extend the use of ponatinib to newly diagnosed CML also.In 2005, encouraging but mixed results of vaccination were reported with the BCR/ABL1 p210 fusion protein
inhibitors, early approval is being sought to extend the use of ponatinib to newly diagnosed CML also.In 2005, encouraging but mixed results of vaccination were reported with the BCR/ABL1 p210 fusion protein in patients with stable disease, with GM-CSF as an adjuvant.Before
reported with the BCR/ABL1 p210 fusion protein in patients with stable disease, with GM-CSF as an adjuvant.Before the advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the median survival time for CML patients had been about 3–5 years from time of diagnosis.With the use of tyrosine
as an adjuvant.Before the advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the median survival time for CML patients had been about 3–5 years from time of diagnosis.With the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, survival rates have improved dramatically. A 2006 followup of 553 patients using imatinib (Gleevec
advent of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the median survival time for CML patients had been about 3–5 years from time of diagnosis.With the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, survival rates have improved dramatically. A 2006 followup of 553 patients using imatinib (Gleevec) found an overall survival rate
an overall survival rate of 95.2% after 8 years, which is similar to the rate in the general population. Fewer than 1% of patients died because of leukemia progression.CML accounts for 8% of all leukaemias in the UK, and around 680 people were diagnosed with
on the outside of the neck or oral cavity. Given the location of these cancers, trouble breathing may also be present.The majority of head and neck cancer is caused by the use of alcohol or tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, with increasing cases linked to the human papillomavirus
Given the location of these cancers, trouble breathing may also be present.The majority of head and neck cancer is caused by the use of alcohol or tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, with increasing cases linked to the human papillomavirus (HPV). Other risk factors include Epstein-
activity, but confirmation will likely not be known until around 2060. This is because oropharyngeal cancer typical presents in the 4th - 6th decade of life, and this is a relatively new vaccine. While screening in the general population does not appear to be useful, screening high risk
often is curable if it is diagnosed early; however, outcomes are typically poor if it is diagnosed late. Treatment may include a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Previous diagnosis and treatment of one head and neck cancer confers higher risk of developing
cancer confers higher risk of developing a second head and neck cancer or recurrence.Globally, head and neck cancer accounts for 650,000 new cases of cancer and 330,000 deaths annually on average. In 2018, it was the seventh most common cancer worldwide with 890,000 new cases documented and 450,000
United States, head and neck cancer makes up 3% of all cancer cases (averaging 53,000 new diagnoses per year) and 1.5% of cancer deaths  Notably, head and neck cancer secondary to chronic alcohol or tobacco use has been steadily declining as less of the population chronically
swelling, and visible lumps on the outside of the neck or oral cavity. Head and neck cancer often begins with benign signs and symptoms of disease, like an enlarged lymph node on the outside of the neck, a hoarse-sounding voice or progressive worsening cough or sore throat
enlarged lymph node on the outside of the neck, a hoarse-sounding voice or progressive worsening cough or sore throat. In the case of head and neck cancer, these symptoms will be notably persistent and become chronic. There may be a lump or a sore in the throat
heal, bleeding from the mouth or numbness, bad breath, discolored patches that persist in the mouth, a sore tongue, and slurring of speech if the cancer is affecting the tongue. There may also be congested sinuses, weight loss, and some numbness or paralysis of facial
numbness or paralysis of facial muscles.Squamous cell cancers are common in areas of the mouth, including the inner lip, tongue, floor of mouth, gums, and hard palate. Cancers of the mouth are strongly associated with tobacco use, especially use of chewing tobacco or dipping
, tongue, floor of mouth, gums, and hard palate. Cancers of the mouth are strongly associated with tobacco use, especially use of chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco, as well as heavy alcohol use. Cancers of this region, particularly the tongue, are more frequently treated
cancers.Surgeries for oral cancers include:Maxillectomy (can be done with or without orbital exenteration)Mandibulectomy (removal of the lower jaw or part of it)Glossectomy (tongue removal, can be total, hemi or partial)Radical neck dissectionCombinational e.g., glossectomy and laryngectomy done together.The defect is typically
). Laryngeal cancer is strongly associated with tobacco smoking.Surgery can include laser excision of small vocal cord lesions, partial laryngectomy (removal of part of the larynx) or total laryngectomy (removal of the whole larynx). If the whole larynx has been removed, the person
, adenocarcinomas, adenoid cystic carcinomas, and mucoepidermoid carcinomas. Rarer still are melanomas and lymphomas of the upper aerodigestive tract.Around 75% of cases are caused by alcohol and tobacco use.Tobacco smoking is one of the main risk factors for head and neck cancer. A major
A major carcinogenic compound in tobacco smoke is acrylonitrile. Acrylonitrile appears to indirectly cause DNA damage by increasing oxidative stress, leading to increased levels of 8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG) and formamidopyrimidine in DNA. (see image). Both 8-oxo-dG
a lifetime increased risk for head and neck cancers that is 5- to 25-fold increased over the general population.The ex-smoker's risk for developing a head and neck cancer begins to approach the risk in the general population 15 years after smoking cessation. The high prevalence
risk for developing a head and neck cancer begins to approach the risk in the general population 15 years after smoking cessation. The high prevalence of tobacco and alcohol use worldwide and the high association of these cancers with these substances makes them ideal targets for enhanced cancer prevention.Smokeless tobacco
oral cancer and oropharyngeal cancer. Cigar smoking is also an important risk factor for oral cancer.Other environmental carcinogens suspected of being potential causes of head and neck cancer include occupational exposures such as nickel ore refining, exposure to textile fibers, and woodworking. Use of marijuana, especially
being potential causes of head and neck cancer include occupational exposures such as nickel ore refining, exposure to textile fibers, and woodworking. Use of marijuana, especially when younger, has been linked to an increase in squamous-cell carcinoma cases in at least one study, while other
other studies suggest use is not shown to be associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma, or associated with decreased squamous cell carcinoma.Excessive consumption of eggs, processed meats, and red meat were associated with increased rates of cancer of the head and neck in one study, while consumption
carcinoma, or associated with decreased squamous cell carcinoma.Excessive consumption of eggs, processed meats, and red meat were associated with increased rates of cancer of the head and neck in one study, while consumption of raw and cooked vegetables seemed to be protective.Vitamin E was not
neck in one study, while consumption of raw and cooked vegetables seemed to be protective.Vitamin E was not found to prevent the development of leukoplakia, the white plaques that are the precursor for carcinomas of the mucosal surfaces, in adult smokers.Another study examined a combination of
%), and least often in the oral cavity (12%–18%) and larynx (3%–7%).Some experts estimate that while up to 50% of cancers of the tonsil may be infected with HPV, only 50% of these are likely to be caused by HPV (as opposed to
HPV16 status is associated with improved prognosis over HPV-negative OSCC.HPV can induce tumor by several mechanisms:E6 and E7 oncogenic proteins.Disruption of tumor suppressor genes.High-level DNA amplifications, for example, oncogenes.Generating alternative nonfunctional transcripts .interchromosomal rearrangements.Distinct host genome methylation
nonfunctional transcripts .interchromosomal rearrangements.Distinct host genome methylation and expression patterns, produced even when virus isn't integrated into the host genome.Induction of cancer can be associated for the expression of viral oncoproteins, the most important E6 and E7, or other mechanisms many of them run by
the most important E6 and E7, or other mechanisms many of them run by the integration such as the generation of altered transcripts, disruption of tumor suppressors, high levels of DNA amplifications, interchromosomial rearrangements, or changes in DNA methylation patterns, the latter being able to find even
, or other mechanisms many of them run by the integration such as the generation of altered transcripts, disruption of tumor suppressors, high levels of DNA amplifications, interchromosomial rearrangements, or changes in DNA methylation patterns, the latter being able to find even when the virus is identified in
degradation while pRb inhibits E7. p53 prevents cell growth when DNA is damaged by activating apoptosis and p21, a kinase that blocks the formation of cyclin D / Cdk4 avoiding pRb phosphorylation and thereby prevents release of E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation
kinase that blocks the formation of cyclin D / Cdk4 avoiding pRb phosphorylation and thereby prevents release of E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation. pRb remains bound to E2F while this action phosphorylated preventing activation of proliferation. Therefore, E6 and E7 act
E2F is a transcription factor required for activation of genes involved in cell proliferation. pRb remains bound to E2F while this action phosphorylated preventing activation of proliferation. Therefore, E6 and E7 act synergistically in triggering cell cycle progression and therefore uncontrolled proliferation by inactivating the p53 and Rb tumor suppressors
in or near oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes and it is for this reason that the integration of the virus can greatly contribute to the development of tumor characteristics. Epstein–Barr virus Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection is associated with nasopharyngeal cancer. Nasopharyngeal cancer occurs endemically in
be measured to screen high-risk populations. Nasopharyngeal cancer has also been associated with consumption of salted fish, which may contain high levels of nitrites.The presence of acid reflux disease (gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD]) or larynx reflux disease can also be a major factor
-risk populations. Nasopharyngeal cancer has also been associated with consumption of salted fish, which may contain high levels of nitrites.The presence of acid reflux disease (gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD]) or larynx reflux disease can also be a major factor. Stomach acids that flow
are more aggressive than others depending upon their location. The stage at which the cancer is diagnosed is also a critical factor in the prognosis of throat cancer. Treatment guidelines recommend routine testing for the presence of HPV for all oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma tumours. Squamous-cell carcinoma Squamous
in both the skin and mucous membranes. It accounts for over 90% of all head and neck cancers, including more than 90% of throat cancer. Squamous cell carcinoma is most likely to appear in males over 40 years of age with a history of heavy alcohol use coupled
and neck cancers, including more than 90% of throat cancer. Squamous cell carcinoma is most likely to appear in males over 40 years of age with a history of heavy alcohol use coupled with smoking.The tumor marker Cyfra 21-1 may be useful in diagnosing squamous cell
(either of intestinal or non-intestinal cell-type).Avoidance of recognised risk factors (as described above) is the single most effective form of prevention. Regular dental examinations may identify pre-cancerous lesions in the oral cavity.When diagnosed early, oral, head and neck cancers
-cancerous lesions in the oral cavity.When diagnosed early, oral, head and neck cancers can be treated more easily and the chances of survival increase tremendously. As of 2017 it was not known if existing HPV vaccines can help prevent head and neck cancer.Improvements in diagnosis
help prevent head and neck cancer.Improvements in diagnosis and local management, as well as targeted therapy, have led to improvements in quality of life and survival for people with head and neck cancer.After a histologic diagnosis has been established and tumor extent determined, the selection of
After a histologic diagnosis has been established and tumor extent determined, the selection of appropriate treatment for a specific cancer depends on a complex array of variables, including tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors,
including tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors, and the person's preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays
tumor site, relative morbidity of various treatment options, concomitant health problems, social and logistic factors, previous primary tumors, and the person's preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays
preference. Treatment planning generally requires a multidisciplinary approach involving specialist surgeons and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays of treatment for most head and neck cancers and remain the standard of care in most cases. For small primary cancers without regional metastases (stage
and medical and radiation oncologists.Surgical resection and radiation therapy are the mainstays of treatment for most head and neck cancers and remain the standard of care in most cases. For small primary cancers without regional metastases (stage I or II), wide surgical excision alone or curative radiation
there has been an emphasis on the use of various induction or concomitant chemotherapy regimens.Surgery as a treatment is frequently used in most types of head and neck cancer. Usually the goal is to remove the cancerous cells entirely. This can be particularly tricky if the cancer is near
(remove) some or all of the cervical lymph nodes to prevent further spread of the disease.CO2 laser surgery is also another form of treatment. Transoral laser microsurgery allows surgeons to remove tumors from the voice box with no external incisions. It also allows access to tumors that
also allows access to tumors that are not reachable with robotic surgery. During the surgery, surgeon and pathologist work together to assess the adequacy of excision (“margin status”), minimizing the amount of normal tissue removed or damaged. This technique helps give the person as much
damaged. This technique helps give the person as much speech and swallowing function as possible after surgery.Radiation therapy is the most common form of treatment. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and
person as much speech and swallowing function as possible after surgery.Radiation therapy is the most common form of treatment. There are different forms of radiation therapy, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in
, including 3D conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, particle beam therapy and brachytherapy, which are commonly used in the treatments of cancers of the head and neck. Most people with head and neck cancer who are treated in the United States and Europe are treated with
therapy using high energy photons. At higher doses, head and neck radiation is associated with thyroid dysfunction and pituitary axis dysfunction. Radiation therapy of head and neck cancers can also cause acute skin reactions of varying levels of severity, which can be treated and managed with topically applied creams
is associated with thyroid dysfunction and pituitary axis dysfunction. Radiation therapy of head and neck cancers can also cause acute skin reactions of varying levels of severity, which can be treated and managed with topically applied creams or specialist films.Chemotherapy in throat cancer is not generally used to cure
establish in other parts of the body. Typical chemotherapy agents are a combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin. Cetuximab is also used in the treatment of throat cancer.Docetaxel-based chemotherapy has shown a very good response in locally advanced head and neck cancer. Docetaxel is the only taxane
, amifostine is often administered intravenously by a chemotherapy clinic prior to IMRT radiotherapy sessions. Amifostine protects the gums and salivary glands from the effects of radiation.There is no evidence that erythropoietin should be routinely given with radiotherapy.Photodynamic therapy may have promise in treating mucosal dysplasia and small
early clinical trials for treatment of advanced head and neck cancer.Targeted therapy, according to the National Cancer Institute, is "a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances, such as monoclonal antibodies, to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells."
pivotal significance, interpretation is difficult since cetuximab-radiotherapy was not directly compared to chemoradiotherapy. The results of ongoing studies to clarify the role of cetuximab in this disease are awaited with interest.Another study evaluated the impact of adding cetuximab to conventional chemotherapy (cisplatin) versus cisplatin alone
cetuximab to conventional chemotherapy (cisplatin) versus cisplatin alone. This study found no improvement in survival or disease-free survival with the addition of cetuximab to the conventional chemotherapy.However, another study which completed in March 2007 found that there was an improvement in survival.A 2010
.However, another study which completed in March 2007 found that there was an improvement in survival.A 2010 review concluded that the combination of cetuximab and platin/5-fluorouracil should be considered the current standard first-line regimen.Gendicine is a gene therapy that employs an adenovirus to
gene therapy that employs an adenovirus to deliver the tumor suppressor gene p53 to cells. It was approved in China in 2003 for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.The mutational profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they
gene p53 to cells. It was approved in China in 2003 for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.The mutational profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment
profile of HPV+ and HPV- head and neck cancer has been reported, further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment that activates the immune system to fight cancer. One type of immunotherapy, immune checkpoint blockade, binds to and blocks inhibitory signals on
further demonstrating that they are fundamentally distinct diseases.Immunotherapy is a type of treatment that activates the immune system to fight cancer. One type of immunotherapy, immune checkpoint blockade, binds to and blocks inhibitory signals on immune cells to release their anti-cancer activities.In 2016,
inhibitory signals on immune cells to release their anti-cancer activities.In 2016, the FDA granted accelerated approval to pembrolizumab for the treatment of people with recurrent or metastatic HNSCC with disease progression on or after platinum-containing chemotherapy. Later that year, the FDA approved nivolumab for
people with head and neck cancer may experience the following symptoms and treatment side effects:Programs to support the emotional and social well-being of people who have been diagnosed with head and neck cancer may be offered. There is no clear evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions or
neck cancer may be offered. There is no clear evidence on the effectiveness of these interventions or any particular type of psychosocial program or length of time that is the most helpful for those with head and neck cancer.Although early-stage head and neck cancers (especially laryngeal and
cancer.Although early-stage head and neck cancers (especially laryngeal and oral cavity) have high cure rates, up to 50% of people with head and neck cancer present with advanced disease.Cure rates decrease in locally advanced cases, whose probability of cure is inversely related
up to 50% of people with head and neck cancer present with advanced disease.Cure rates decrease in locally advanced cases, whose probability of cure is inversely related to tumor size and even more so to the extent of regional node involvement. (citation needed). HPV-
and neck squamous-cell cancers. These staging systems attempt to standardize clinical trial criteria for research studies, and attempt to define prognostic categories of disease. Squamous cell cancers of the head and neck are staged according to the TNM classification system, where T is the size and configuration
are staged according to the TNM classification system, where T is the size and configuration of the tumor, N is the presence or absence of lymph node metastases, and M is the presence or absence of distant metastases. The T, N, and M characteristics are combined to
produce a “stage” of the cancer, from I to IVB.Survival advantages provided by new treatment modalities have been undermined by the significant percentage of people cured of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) who subsequently develop second primary tumors. The incidence of second primary tumors ranges
, called field cancerization.Many people with head and neck cancer are also not able to eat sufficiently. A tumor may impair a person's ability to swallow and eat, and throat cancer may affect the digestive system. The difficulty in swallowing can lead to a person to choke
throat cancer may affect the digestive system. The difficulty in swallowing can lead to a person to choke on their food in the early stages of digestion and interfere with the food's smooth travels down into the esophagus and beyond.The treatments for throat cancer can also be harmful to
vomiting can lead to an electrolyte imbalance which has serious consequences for the proper functioning of the heart. Frequent vomiting can also upset the balance of stomach acids which has a negative impact on the digestive system, especially the lining of the stomach and esophagus.Enteral feeding, a method
on the digestive system, especially the lining of the stomach and esophagus.Enteral feeding, a method that adds nutrients directly into a person's stomach using a nasogastric feeding tube or a gastrostomy tube, may be necessary for some people. Further research is required to determine the most
If the throat cancer is near the bottom of the throat, it has a high likelihood of spreading to the lungs and interfering with the person's ability to breathe; this is even more likely if the person is a smoker, because they are highly susceptible to lung cancer.Cancer
the throat cancer is near the bottom of the throat, it has a high likelihood of spreading to the lungs and interfering with the person's ability to breathe; this is even more likely if the person is a smoker, because they are highly susceptible to lung cancer.Cancer
decreased ability or inability to eat, speak or effectively communicate. Physical appearance is often altered by both the cancer itself or as a consequence of treatment side effects. Psychological distress may occur and feelings such as uncertainty and fear may arise. Some people may also have a changed physical
Experience Increased Caregiver Distress Unique to care for Head and Neck Cancer PatientsMultiple studies have shown caregivers for head and neck cancer patients show higher rates of distress and poorer mental health compared to both the general population as well as those caring for non-head-and-neck cancer patients
will encounter during the treatment and recovery phase for this unique patient population, which span both technical and emotional support. Of note, caregivers of patient's who report lower quality of life, demonstrate increased burden and fatigue that extents beyond the treatment phase.Examples of technically difficult caregiver
phase for this unique patient population, which span both technical and emotional support. Of note, caregivers of patient's who report lower quality of life, demonstrate increased burden and fatigue that extents beyond the treatment phase.Examples of technically difficult caregiver duties include: tube feeding, oral
throat cancer can throw the nervous system into chaos, making it unable to properly regulate and control the body.The number of new cases of head and neck cancers in the United States was 40,490 in 2006, accounting for about 3% of adult malignancies. A total of 11,170
in the Far East. In Southeast China and Taiwan, head and neck cancer, specifically nasopharyngeal cancer, is the most-common cause of death in young men.In 2008, there were 22,900 cases of oral cavity cancer, 12,250 cases of laryngeal cancer, and 12,410 cases
cases of pharyngeal cancer in the United States.In 2002, 7,400 Americans were projected to die of these cancers.More than 70% of throat cancers are at an advanced stage when discovered.Men are 89% more likely than women to be diagnosed with, and are almost
and are almost twice as likely to die of these cancers.African Americans are disproportionately affected by head and neck cancer, with younger ages of incidence, increased mortality, and more advanced disease at presentation. Laryngeal cancer incidence is higher in African Americans relative to white, Asian,

and NASH are also increasingly recognized as risk factors for HCC.As with any cancer, the treatment and prognosis of HCC vary depending on the specifics of tumor histology, size, how far the cancer has spread, and overall health.The vast majority of HCC occurs in Asia and sub
reasons.Most cases of HCC occur in people who already have signs and symptoms of chronic liver disease. They may present either with worsening of symptoms or may be without symptoms at the time of cancer detection. HCC may present with non-specific symptoms such as  abdominal pain
already have signs and symptoms of chronic liver disease. They may present either with worsening of symptoms or may be without symptoms at the time of cancer detection. HCC may present with non-specific symptoms such as  abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, or feeling tired. Some
yellow skin (also called jaundice), abdominal swelling due to fluid in the abdominal cavity, easy bruising from blood clotting abnormalities, loss of appetite, unintentional weight loss, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, or feeling tired.Because HCC mostly occurs in people with cirrhosis of
certain risk factors are much more highly associated with HCC than others. For example, while heavy alcohol consumption is estimated to cause 60–70% of cirrhosis, the vast majority of HCC occurs in cirrhosis attributed to viral hepatitis (although there may be overlap). Recognized risk factors include
% cases globally)Chronic hepatitis B (about 50% cases)Chronic hepatitis C (about  25% cases)Toxins:Alcohol abuse: the most common cause of cirrhosisAflatoxinIron overload state (hemochromatosis)Pyrrolizidine alkaloidsMetabolic:Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: up to 20% progress to cirrhosis Type 2 diabetes (probably aided by obesity)Congenital disorders
:Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: up to 20% progress to cirrhosis Type 2 diabetes (probably aided by obesity)Congenital disorders:Alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiencyWilson's disease (controversial; while some theorise the risk increases, case studies are rare and suggest the opposite where Wilson's disease actually may confer
risk increases, case studies are rare and suggest the opposite where Wilson's disease actually may confer protection)Hemophilia, although statistically associated with higher risk of HCC, this is due to coincident chronic viral hepatitis infection related to repeated blood transfusions over lifetime.The significance of these risk factors varies
the predominant cause. In populations largely protected by hepatitis B vaccination, such as the United States, HCC is most often linked to causes of cirrhosis such as chronic hepatitis C, obesity, and alcohol abuse.Certain benign liver tumors, such as hepatocellular adenoma, may sometimes be
Certain benign liver tumors, such as hepatocellular adenoma, may sometimes be associated with coexisting malignant HCC. Evidence is limited for the true incidence of malignancy associated with benign adenomas; however, the size of hepatic adenoma is considered to correspond to risk of malignancy and so larger tumors may
is limited for the true incidence of malignancy associated with benign adenomas; however, the size of hepatic adenoma is considered to correspond to risk of malignancy and so larger tumors may be surgically removed. Certain subtypes of adenoma, particularly those with β-catenin activation mutation, are particularly
however, the size of hepatic adenoma is considered to correspond to risk of malignancy and so larger tumors may be surgically removed. Certain subtypes of adenoma, particularly those with β-catenin activation mutation, are particularly associated with increased risk of HCC.Chronic liver disease is rare in children and
.The risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in type 2 diabetics is greater (from 2.5 to 7.1 times the nondiabetic risk) depending on the duration of diabetes and treatment protocol. A suspected contributor to this increased risk is circulating insulin concentration such that diabetics with poor insulin control or on treatments
affecting the cellular machinery cause the cell to replicate at a higher rate and/or result in the cell avoiding apoptosis.In particular, chronic infections of hepatitis B and/or C can aid the development of hepatocellular carcinoma by repeatedly causing the body's own immune system to attack the liver cells,
, which in turn can cause DNA damage and lead to carcinogenic gene mutations.  Reactive oxygen species also cause epigenetic alterations at the sites of DNA repair.While this constant cycle of damage followed by repair can lead to mistakes during repair, which in turn lead to carcinogenesis,
and lead to carcinogenic gene mutations.  Reactive oxygen species also cause epigenetic alterations at the sites of DNA repair.While this constant cycle of damage followed by repair can lead to mistakes during repair, which in turn lead to carcinogenesis, this hypothesis is more applicable, at present
in turn lead to carcinogenesis, this hypothesis is more applicable, at present, to hepatitis C. Chronic hepatitis C causes HCC through the stage of cirrhosis. In chronic hepatitis B, however, the integration of the viral genome into infected cells can directly induce a noncirrhotic liver to develop
the integration of the viral genome into infected cells can directly induce a noncirrhotic liver to develop HCC. Alternatively, repeated consumption of large amounts of ethanol can have a similar effect. The toxin aflatoxin from certain Aspergillus species of fungi is a carcinogen and aids carcinogenesis of hepatocellular cancer by
to develop HCC. Alternatively, repeated consumption of large amounts of ethanol can have a similar effect. The toxin aflatoxin from certain Aspergillus species of fungi is a carcinogen and aids carcinogenesis of hepatocellular cancer by building up in the liver. The combined high prevalence of rates of aflatoxin and
from certain Aspergillus species of fungi is a carcinogen and aids carcinogenesis of hepatocellular cancer by building up in the liver. The combined high prevalence of rates of aflatoxin and hepatitis B in settings such as  China and West Africa has led to relatively high rates of hepatocellular carcinoma in these
Aspergillus species of fungi is a carcinogen and aids carcinogenesis of hepatocellular cancer by building up in the liver. The combined high prevalence of rates of aflatoxin and hepatitis B in settings such as  China and West Africa has led to relatively high rates of hepatocellular carcinoma in these regions.
related to HCC.Methods of diagnosis in HCC have evolved with the improvement in medical imaging. The evaluation of both asymptomatic patients and those with symptoms of liver disease involves blood testing and imaging evaluation. Although historically a biopsy of the tumor was required to prove the diagnosis, imaging (especially
enough to obviate histopathologic confirmation.HCC remains associated with a high mortality rate, in part related to initial diagnosis commonly at an advanced stage of disease. As with other cancers, outcomes are significantly improved if treatment is initiated earlier in the disease process. Because the vast majority of
the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases, which recommends screening people with cirrhosis with ultrasound every 6 months, with or without measurement of blood levels of tumor marker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). Elevated levels of AFP are associated with active HCC disease, although inconsistently reliable
for the Study of Liver Diseases, which recommends screening people with cirrhosis with ultrasound every 6 months, with or without measurement of blood levels of tumor marker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). Elevated levels of AFP are associated with active HCC disease, although inconsistently reliable. At levels
hepatitis C or fatty liver disease, and thus there is some controversy surrounding whether surveillance truly leads to a reduction in mortality in this population of patients with cirrhosis.”In a person where a higher suspicion of HCC exists, such as a person with symptoms or abnormal blood tests (
CT scan, and MRI may be used to evaluate the liver for HCC. On CT and MRI, HCC can have three distinct patterns of growth:A single large tumorMultiple tumorsPoorly defined tumor with an infiltrative growth patternA systematic review of CT diagnosis found that the sensitivity was 68%
and MRI, HCC can have three distinct patterns of growth:A single large tumorMultiple tumorsPoorly defined tumor with an infiltrative growth patternA systematic review of CT diagnosis found that the sensitivity was 68% (95% CI 55–80%) and specificity was 93% (95% CI 89–96
.MRI is more sensitive and specific than CT.Liver image reporting and data system (LI-RADS) is a classification system for the reporting of liver lesions detected on CT and MRI. Radiologists use this standardized system to report on suspicious lesions and to provide an estimated likelihood of malignancy
reporting of liver lesions detected on CT and MRI. Radiologists use this standardized system to report on suspicious lesions and to provide an estimated likelihood of malignancy. Categories range from LI-RADS (LR) 1 to 5, in order of concern for cancer. A biopsy is not
suspicious lesions and to provide an estimated likelihood of malignancy. Categories range from LI-RADS (LR) 1 to 5, in order of concern for cancer. A biopsy is not needed to confirm the diagnosis of HCC if certain imaging criteria are met.Macroscopically, liver cancer
appears as a nodular or infiltrative tumor. The nodular type may be solitary (large mass) or multiple (when developed as a complication of cirrhosis). Tumor nodules are round to oval, gray or green (if the tumor produces bile), well circumscribed but not encapsulated
like hepatocellular carcinoma – has also been described.				BCLC Staging SystemThe prognosis of HCC is affected by the staging of the tumor and the liver's function due to the effects of liver cirrhosis.A number of staging classifications for HCC are available; however, due to the unique nature
hepatocellular carcinoma – has also been described.				BCLC Staging SystemThe prognosis of HCC is affected by the staging of the tumor and the liver's function due to the effects of liver cirrhosis.A number of staging classifications for HCC are available; however, due to the unique nature
described.				BCLC Staging SystemThe prognosis of HCC is affected by the staging of the tumor and the liver's function due to the effects of liver cirrhosis.A number of staging classifications for HCC are available; however, due to the unique nature of the carcinoma  to fully
prognosis of HCC is affected by the staging of the tumor and the liver's function due to the effects of liver cirrhosis.A number of staging classifications for HCC are available; however, due to the unique nature of the carcinoma  to fully encompass all the features that affect
of the HCC, a classification system should incorporate tumor size and number, presence of vascular invasion and extrahepatic spread, liver function (levels of serum bilirubin and albumin, presence of ascites, and portal hypertension) and general health status of the patient (defined by the ECOG classification
should incorporate tumor size and number, presence of vascular invasion and extrahepatic spread, liver function (levels of serum bilirubin and albumin, presence of ascites, and portal hypertension) and general health status of the patient (defined by the ECOG classification and the presence of symptoms).Of all the
albumin, presence of ascites, and portal hypertension) and general health status of the patient (defined by the ECOG classification and the presence of symptoms).Of all the staging classification systems available the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer  staging classification encompasses all of the above characteristics. This staging classification can
above characteristics. This staging classification can be used  to select people for treatment.Important features that guide treatment include:sizespread (stage)involvement of liver vesselspresence of a tumor capsulepresence of extrahepatic metastasespresence of daughter nodulesvascularity of the tumorMRI is the best imaging method to detect the presence of a
to select people for treatment.Important features that guide treatment include:sizespread (stage)involvement of liver vesselspresence of a tumor capsulepresence of extrahepatic metastasespresence of daughter nodulesvascularity of the tumorMRI is the best imaging method to detect the presence of a tumor capsule.The most common sites of metastasis are
extrahepatic metastasespresence of daughter nodulesvascularity of the tumorMRI is the best imaging method to detect the presence of a tumor capsule.The most common sites of metastasis are the lung, abdominal lymph nodes, and bone.Since hepatitis B and C are some of the main causes of hepatocellular carcinoma
the lung, abdominal lymph nodes, and bone.Since hepatitis B and C are some of the main causes of hepatocellular carcinoma, prevention of infection is key to then prevent HCC. Thus, childhood vaccination against hepatitis B may reduce the risk of liver cancer in the future.
causes of hepatocellular carcinoma, prevention of infection is key to then prevent HCC. Thus, childhood vaccination against hepatitis B may reduce the risk of liver cancer in the future.  In the case of patients with cirrhosis, alcohol consumption is to be avoided. Also, screening for
then prevent HCC. Thus, childhood vaccination against hepatitis B may reduce the risk of liver cancer in the future.  In the case of patients with cirrhosis, alcohol consumption is to be avoided. Also, screening for hemochromatosis may be beneficial for some patients.Whether screening those
for some patients.Whether screening those with chronic liver disease for HCC improves outcomes is unclear.Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma varies by the stage of disease, a person's likelihood to tolerate surgery, and availability of liver transplant:Curative intention: for limited disease, when the cancer
screening those with chronic liver disease for HCC improves outcomes is unclear.Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma varies by the stage of disease, a person's likelihood to tolerate surgery, and availability of liver transplant:Curative intention: for limited disease, when the cancer is limited to one or
improves outcomes is unclear.Treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma varies by the stage of disease, a person's likelihood to tolerate surgery, and availability of liver transplant:Curative intention: for limited disease, when the cancer is limited to one or more areas of within the liver, surgically
tumors, with the goal of once again qualifying for liver transplant after this treatment.Palliative intention: for more advanced disease, including spread of cancer beyond the liver or in persons who may not tolerate surgery, treatment intended to decrease symptoms of disease and maximize duration of survival.
for more advanced disease, including spread of cancer beyond the liver or in persons who may not tolerate surgery, treatment intended to decrease symptoms of disease and maximize duration of survival.Loco-regional therapy (also referred to as liver-directed therapy) refers to any one of
including spread of cancer beyond the liver or in persons who may not tolerate surgery, treatment intended to decrease symptoms of disease and maximize duration of survival.Loco-regional therapy (also referred to as liver-directed therapy) refers to any one of several minimally-invasive treatment
, or arterial catheter-based therapies (chemoembolization or radioembolization).Surgical removal of the tumor is associated with better cancer prognosis, but only 5–15% of patients are suitable for surgical resection due to the extent of disease or poor liver function. Surgery is only considered if the entire tumor can
removal of the tumor is associated with better cancer prognosis, but only 5–15% of patients are suitable for surgical resection due to the extent of disease or poor liver function. Surgery is only considered if the entire tumor can be safely removed while preserving sufficient functional liver to maintain normal
be safely removed while preserving sufficient functional liver to maintain normal physiology. Thus, preoperative imaging assessment is critical  to determine both the extent of HCC and to estimate the amount of residual liver remaining after surgery. To maintain liver function, residual liver volume should exceed 25% of
. The overall recurrence rate after resection is 50-60%. The Singapore Liver Cancer Recurrence  score can be used to estimate risk of recurrence after surgery.Liver transplantation, replacing the diseased liver with a cadaveric or a living donor liver, plays an increasing role in treatment
rates similar to those achieved using the Milan criteria. Studies from the late 2000s obtained higher survival rates ranging from 67% to 91%.The risks of liver transplantation extend beyond risk of the procedure itself. The immunosuppressive medication  required after surgery to prevent rejection of the donor liver also impairs
natural ability to combat dysfunctional cells. If the tumor has spread undetected outside the liver before the transplant, the medication effectively increases the rate of disease progression and decreases survival. With this in mind, liver transplant "can be a curative approach for patients with advanced HCC without extrahepatic
is complete. The patient  spends the first postoperative night in the intensive care unit and typically is discharged in 3–5 days. Proper selection of patients and attention to detail in performing the cryosurgical procedure are mandatory to achieve good results and outcomes. Frequently, cryosurgery is used in conjunction
in the tumor vasculature, causing ischemia and delivering their radiation dose directly to the lesion. This technique allows for a higher, local dose of radiation to be delivered directly to the tumor while sparing normal healthy tissue. While not curative, patients have increased survival. No studies have
tissue. While not curative, patients have increased survival. No studies have been done to compare whether SIRT is superior to TACE in terms of survival outcomes, although retrospective studies suggest similar efficacy. Two products are available, SIR-Spheres and TheraSphere. The latter is an FDA
, but outside the US, SIR-Spheres are approved for the treatment of any nonresectable liver cancer including primary liver cancer.The role of radiotherapy in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma has evolved as technological advancements in treatment delivery and imaging have provided a means for safe and effective radiotherapy
for advanced HCC.Portal vein embolization (PVE): This technique is sometimes used to increase the volume of healthy liver, in order to improve chances of survival following surgical removal of diseased liver. For example, embolization of the right main portal vein would result in compensatory hypertrophy of the left
. Excluding a study of only one patient, post-treatment CT evaluation of the tumor showed a response ranging from 29 to 100% of patients evaluated, with all but two studies showing a response of 71% or greater.The usual outcome is poor because only 10–20%
sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia, HCC is the most common cancer, generally affecting men more than women, and with an age of onset between the late teens and 30s. This variability is in part due to the different patterns of hepatitis B and hepatitis C transmission in
than women, and with an age of onset between the late teens and 30s. This variability is in part due to the different patterns of hepatitis B and hepatitis C transmission in different populations – infection at or around birth predispose to earlier cancers than if people are infected later.
Manson's textbook of tropical diseases. HCC is one of the deadliest cancers in China, where chronic hepatitis B is found in 90% of cases. In Japan, chronic hepatitis C is associated with 90% of HCC cases. Foods infected with Aspergillus flavus (especially peanuts and
United States, the US surveillance, epidemiology, and end results  database program, shows that HCC accounts for 65% of all cases of liver cancers. As screening programs are in place for high-risk persons with chronic liver disease, HCC is often discovered much earlier in
. The diagnosis of an acute hepatic porphyria (AIP, HCP, VP) should be sought in patients with HCC without typical risk factors of hepatitis B or C, alcoholic liver cirrhosis, or hemochromatosis. Both active and latent genetic carriers of acute hepatic porphyriasare at risk for this
being low, the diagnosis of HCC has increased since the 1980s and it is continuing to increase, making it one of the rising causes of death due to cancer. The common risk factor for HCC is hepatitis C, along with other health issues.Mipsagargin (G-202),
resultant proteins could lead to the identification of pharmacological interventions for HCC.The development of three-dimensional culture methods provides a new approach for preclinical studies of cancer therapy using patient-derived organoids. These miniaturized organoid  'avatars'  of a patient's tumor recapitulate several features of the
a new approach for preclinical studies of cancer therapy using patient-derived organoids. These miniaturized organoid  'avatars'  of a patient's tumor recapitulate several features of the original tumor, rendering them an attractive model for drug-sensitivity testing and precision medicine for HCC and other
types of primary liver cancer.Furthermore, HCC occurs in patients with liver disease. A biomarker named six-miRNA signature allows effective treatment of patients with HCC and is able to predict its recurrence in the liver.JX-594, an oncolytic virus, has orphan drug designation for this
cancer vaccine, also has US FDA orphan drug designation for HCC. Immunitor Inc. completed a Phase II trial, published in 2017.A randomized trial of people with advanced HCC showed no benefit for the combination of everolimus and pasireotide.HemihypertrophyOncovirusPortal hypertension"Long-term results of liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma
HCC. Immunitor Inc. completed a Phase II trial, published in 2017.A randomized trial of people with advanced HCC showed no benefit for the combination of everolimus and pasireotide.HemihypertrophyOncovirusPortal hypertension"Long-term results of liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: an update of the University of Padova experience".
published in 2017.A randomized trial of people with advanced HCC showed no benefit for the combination of everolimus and pasireotide.HemihypertrophyOncovirusPortal hypertension"Long-term results of liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: an update of the University of Padova experience". September 23, 2013. Retrieved 6 February 2014.Bruix,
